
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/10514/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 March 2018                           |  On 14 March 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     sM
                         (anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Clarke
For the Respondent:    FH (respondent's niece)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in these  proceedings,
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. For reasons which will become apparent,  I  permitted  the  appellant's
    niece to represent him pursuant to rule 11(5) of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    The background to the appeal

 3. The background to the appeal is as follows. The appellant claims to  be
    a citizen of Somalia, although the respondent contends  that  he  is  a
    citizen of Kenya. He arrived in the UK  on  16  October  2002  and  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain on 17 March 2010.

 4. He was convicted of robbery on 12 May 2010 after a plea of guilty,  and
    on 4  August  2010  received  a  sentence  of  3  years  and  6  months
    imprisonment. On 12 September 2016 the respondent made  a  decision  to
    deport him, the decision being expressed as a  decision  to  refuse  an
    asylum and human rights claim. The decision also included a certificate
    pursuant to section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act") (presumption of particularly  serious  crime  and
    danger to the community).

 5. His appeal against that decision came before First-tier  Tribunal  A.M.
    Black ("the FtJ") on 3 July 2017. She allowed  the  appeal  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds and also with reference to Article 3  of  the  ECHR.
    She also declined to uphold the s.72 certificate.

 6. The respondent appealed against that decision. Permission  having  been
    granted, the appeal initially came before me on  20  October  2017.  At
    that hearing the appellant was not legally (or otherwise)  represented,
    and had not been represented before the FtJ.

 7. There was evidence before the FtJ to  the  effect  that  the  appellant
    suffers from paranoid schizophrenia and depression, for which he  takes
    medication. In 2016 he was detained  under  section  3  of  the  Mental
    Health Act 1983 at G hospital.  He  has  a  history  of  mental  health
    problems going back to 2004.

 8. At the hearing before me in October 2017, the appellant was accompanied
    by his niece, FH. I heard submissions from the respondent  in  relation
    to the decision of the FtJ  and  announced  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision in terms of whether there was an error of law on the  part  of
    the FtJ, and if so, what should then follow.

 9. However, as set out in a written adjournment decision, I  decided  that
    it would be inappropriate to decide any  issues  for  the  time  being,
    without affording the appellant a further opportunity to  obtain  legal
    representation. It seems he had previously at some stage  been  legally
    represented.

10. As also explained in that adjournment decision, and  repeated  in  this
    decision, at that hearing the appellant's presentation was, putting  it
    neutrally so far as  I  can,  unusual.  He  openly  and  ostentatiously
    sprayed himself with cologne at the start of the hearing. He  was  very
    excitable and talkative, addressing the  presenting  officer  directly,
    and also attempting to explain his situation to court  staff.  Much  of
    what he said was incoherent or tangential.  He  repeatedly  interrupted
    the presenting officer. At one point he started to take off his  shirt,
    and only desisted when I informed him that I would leave the room if he
    persisted.  He was not threatening and obviously tried  to  be  polite,
    but it was only with very careful management, and the assistance of his
    niece, that his behaviour could be controlled.

11. At the end of the hearing the appellant and his niece were provided  by
    court staff with information about how to obtain  legal  representation
    through the system of legal aid. I was informed by  FH  that  they  had
    previously paid a significant sum for  legal  representation  but  that
    they no longer had the funds to do so.

12. I made careful directions tailored to the fact that the  appellant  was
    not represented and did not appear to have the  capacity  to  represent
    himself. The directions were, to summarise, designed to  encourage  his
    family to try to obtain legally aided representation for him in advance
    of the next hearing.

13. However, from what I was told at the  resumed  hearing  (7  March),  no
    legal representative could be found. Hence FH asked that she be allowed
    to represent the appellant.

14. The  resumed  hearing,  for  understandable  reasons,  proceeded  in  a
    slightly unconventional manner in terms of the submissions on behalf of
    the appellant which at times merged into the giving of evidence both by
    the  appellant  and  FH.  Although  at  the  hearing  in  October  2017
    submissions were made on behalf of the respondent on the error  of  law
    issue, Ms Isherwood agreed that the respondent's submissions should  be
    advanced afresh. I have therefore proceeded on the basis of those  oral
    submissions (which in fact were not significantly different from  those
    advanced at the October 2017 hearing).

    The grounds and submissions

15. The respondent's grounds upon which permission was granted contend that
    the FtJ "failed to give clear reasons" as to why she concluded that the
    appellant was not a Kenyan national (the  respondent's  primary  case),
    but that he was a Somalian national. The appellant and his  family  had
    been issued with Kenyan passports by the Kenyan authorities.  The  fact
    that the Kenyan authorities stated that  they  could  not  confirm  the
    genuineness of the passports did not mean that they were  not  in  fact
    genuine.

16. Further, it is argued that the FtJ was wrong to take into account  that
    the appellant's mother's grant  of  refugee  status  in  the  UK  as  a
    Somalian refugee has not been  revoked.  That  was  a  matter  for  the
    Secretary of State to consider and not one for  the  FtJ  to  speculate
    upon.

17. Thus, the FtJ was wrong, it is said, not to consider the feasibility of
    the appellant's return to Kenya.

18. In relation to return to Somalia, it is contended that  the  FtJ  erred
    when she concluded that the appellant could not return to Mogadishu  on
    the basis of his minority clan status,  having  regard  to  MOJ  &  Ors
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) whereby it  is
    clear that minority clan status  does  not  give  rise  to  a  risk  of
    persecution in Mogadishu.

19. Further, as to the risk of destitution, the FtJ  had  "failed  to  give
    clear reasons" as to why the appellant would be unable to  collect  any
    remittances from his family in the UK, and failed to  consider  whether
    or not the appellant could benefit from any of the  packages  available
    under the Facilitated Returns Scheme.

20. Relying on the decision in Said v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 442, it is argued that the appellant in that
    case also had mental health problems and it was decided that there  was
    no reason as to why he could not  re-establish  himself  on  return  to
    Mogadishu. In addition, there was an erroneous reliance by the FtJ on a
    GP's report in  terms  of  the  appellant's  treatment  and  day-to-day
    difficulties. The GP was not an expert "in the field of  schizophrenia"
    and the evidence did not suggest that the appellant needed a  level  of
    care that was not available in Mogadishu.

21. Lastly, it is said that the FtJ had failed to give clear reasons as  to
    why the appellant would satisfy the  high  threshold  for  a  claim  to
    succeed on Article 3 grounds. She had referred to the fact  that  there
    were two hospitals in Mogadishu and the respondent's decision noted the
    presence of at least five mental health centres.

22. In her submissions, Ms Isherwood relied  on  the  written  grounds  and
    where necessary I explained her submissions to FH and to the appellant.
    It was accepted on behalf of the respondent  that  there  had  been  no
    challenge to the FtJ's rejection of the certificate under s.72  of  the
    2002 Act and although it was suggested that there were defects  in  the
    FtJ's conclusions in that respect, no challenge had  been  advanced  in
    the grounds and it was accepted that  that  matter  could  not  now  be
    pursued.

23. In relation to the appellant's nationality, it was submitted  that  the
    FtJ had accepted the appellant's evidence that the Kenyan passport  was
    not genuine  and  that  it  (and  those  issued  to  the  family)  were
    fraudulent documents. However, all that the Kenyan authorities had said
    was that they could not verify the documents. Further, the  appellant's
    mother's refugee status was a matter for the Secretary of State.

24. In relation to return to  Somalia,  the  FtJ  had  concluded  that  the
    appellant would be at risk because  of  his  ethnicity,  but  that  was
    contrary to MOJ & Ors. In response to my enquiry as to whether  it  was
    accepted on behalf of the respondent that the  appellant  would  be  at
    risk of persecution in his home area, Ms Isherwood said  that  in  this
    respect the decision letter was relied on, and it  was  said  that  the
    appellant would be returned to Mogadishu. Beyond that she said she  was
    not prepared to go.

25. It was for the appellant to establish that he would not be able to  get
    support on return to Mogadishu. Support can be  provided  by  the  (UK)
    government. It was not enough for the appellant to  say  that  all  his
    family are in the UK, that he has not been to Mogadishu before or  that
    he is not familiar with the city.

26. The medical evidence  before  the  FtJ  was  "historic",  and  did  not
    demonstrate that the Article 3 threshold was met.  I  was  referred  to
    Said at [12], [13] and [18] as to the need for  an  appellant  to  meet
    that high threshold.

27. FH said that in order to flee from Somalia  he  had  to  get  a  forged
    Kenyan passport, and those are still available today,  provided  by  an
    agent.  Most  members  of  the  Somalian  community  here  had   Kenyan
    passports.

28. She said that if the appellant went back to Mogadishu there would be no-
    one to support him. It would not be safe for him to go  back.  He  does
    not know anyone and has no connexions there. His mother in the  UK  had
    had a stroke.

29. In answer to my questions  the  appellant  said  that  he  still  takes
    medication  which  he  named  as  Olanzapine  (an  anti-psychotic)  and
    Citalopram (an anti-depressant). FHsaid that she and her  brother  give
    him his medicine because he does not take it by himself.

30. In response to an enquiry from me, Ms Isherwood said that the appellant
    had been  arrested  "this  week"  (5  March)  by  Herts  police  ,  and
    supporting documents in that respect were provided.  They  reveal  that
    the appellant was arrested for "the possession of a white powder",  but
    that he had not been interviewed in relation to that matter and had not
    been charged. It appears from the PNC printout that he is to appear  at
    West and  Central  Hertfordshire  Magistrates'  Court  on  2  May  2018
    (although for what is not stated).

31. In relation to his arrest (on 5 March 2018) the appellant said that  he
    did not have any drugs on him and his solicitor had said that the  case
    was nothing. He said that he was not a bad  person  and  has  not  been
    violent. When I reminded him that he had been convicted of  robbery  he
    said that his barrister had told him to plead guilty which he did as he
    wanted to go home.

32. He said that his appearance at the Magistrates' Court on 2 May 2018  is
    in relation to stealing clothes from a charity shop. He  seemed  to  be
    attempting to explain that he had not stolen any clothes  and  that  it
    was some Romanians that he was with that had done that,  although  what
    the appellant said was not clear.

33. In relation to those matters, Ms Isherwood  submitted  that  that  does
    show that the appellant is capable of going out on his own and  is  not
    always with his family or being assisted by them.

34. FH's response was that most of the time the appellant was with them but
    they cannot be with him 24 hours  a  day.  He  has  made  friends  with
    his/their grandmother's neighbours who are Romanians and take  him  out
    for a drive. She has tried to tell them not to go around with them  but
    he does not think right.

    The FtJ's decision

35. I propose to give a fairly full summary of the FtJ's  decision  because
    that will help to put my conclusions on the respondent's  grounds  into
    context.

36. The FtJ summarised the appellant's claim as  to  the  circumstances  in
    which he left Somalia. Thus, he is said to be  from  Kismayo  where  he
    lived with his parents and siblings. At the age of 13 the appellant saw
    his father  being  ill-treated  in  the  family  home  by  militia  and
    witnessed his sister being raped several times. He also saw his  father
    shot in the head and killed by militia. The family home was confiscated
    and the family sought refuge with the help of neighbours.

37. Three weeks after the attack they went to Kenya where they  were  taken
    to a refugee camp in which the conditions  were  appalling.  They  were
    harassed by Kenyan police and local Kenyans. The appellant  was  beaten
    by the police and detained for three days. The  family  stayed  in  the
    camp for six years until it was closed by the government.

38. The family  then  stayed  with  friends  and  neighbours  who  received
    financial support from relatives in the USA. The  appellant  was  again
    detained by the police and beaten, but released on payment of a  bribe.
    Arrangements were made for the appellant to leave the country with  the
    assistance of an agent and the use of a false Kenyan passport.

39. It is not necessary to set out the FtJ's reasons  for  concluding  that
    the appellant had rebutted the presumptions provided for in s.72 of the
    2002 Act (presumption of particularly serious crime and danger  to  the
    community) given that there is no  challenge  to  that  aspect  of  the
    decision.

40. At [39] the FtJ stated that the appellant has very poor  mental  health
    and is taking medication for paranoid schizophrenia and depression. She
    referred to his evidence that he  attends  medical  appointments  every
    week and attends hospital once a month.

41. At [41] the FtJ stated that she was satisfied that the appellant  is  a
    wholly credible and reliable witness, as was his nephew, Mr H. She said
    that their evidence was consistent, transparent and coherent. She  said
    that the appellant answered  questions  quickly  and  openly,  and  his
    evidence was freely given even when to his detriment.

42. The FtJ dealt with the issue of the appellant's  nationality  at  [42].
    She referred to the letter produced on behalf of the respondent being a
    letter dated 23 March 2016 from the Kenyan  Ministry  of  Interior  and
    Coordination of National Government which stated that the appellant and
    various identified members of the family had  travelled  on  particular
    passports. The letter also stated that "We cannot however  confirm  the
    authenticity of all the above passports and their holders  as  this  is
    only possible when the original passports are availed."

43. She went on to note the appellant's case that he and his  family  lived
    in refugee "camps" in Kenya and that agents  had  provided  the  Kenyan
    passports. She noted that the appellant's mother was one of those  that
    did so (her name being one of those on the letter). She  then  referred
    to the fact that the appellant's mother has been granted asylum by  the
    respondent "presumably on the ground that it was accepted that she  was
    a member of a minority clan in Somalia and would be at risk on return."

44. She then said as follows:

             "Given that  stance,  it  is  not  clear  on  what  basis  the
             respondent now seeks to aver that the appellant and his mother
             are entitled to Kenyan nationality.  There  is  no  indication
             that the respondent has sought to revoke  the  refugee  status
             granted to the appellant's mother. The appellant told  me  the
             agent had obtained his Kenyan passport and that it was a false
             document; he was not entitled to Kenyan citizenship.  This  is
             consistent with the appellant  and  his  family  living  in  a
             refugee camp in Kenya. I accept the  appellant's  account  and
             find that he is not entitled to Kenyan citizenship.  He  is  a
             Somali citizen."

45. She went on to find that the appellant is a member of a minority  clan,
    that he was born in Kismayo, and that  that  was  consistent  with  his
    speaking Bravanese but not Somali. She also stated that she  found  the
    appellant a credible witness and adopted as her findings  of  fact  her
    summary of his claim.

46. Next, the FtJ set out verbatim the guidance in MOJ & Ors. She  referred
    to background evidence set out in RH (Sweden) App No. 4601/14 (in 2015)
    and K.A.B. v Sweden, Application No.  17299/12,  5  September  2013  in
    terms of the human rights and security situation in Somalia  which  was
    "serious and fragile" but there had been improvements.

47. At [47] she noted that the appellant had never lived in  Mogadishu  and
    found that he is not familiar with the  city.  He  is  a  member  of  a
    minority clan, and lived with his family in southern Somalia  until  he
    fled when a child. She found that he has no family in Somalia and  that
    his family is in Kenya where they are refugees.

48. In the same paragraph she said that the appellant  has  been  diagnosed
    with paranoid schizophrenia since 2004 for which he  takes  medication.
    She referred to a medical report dated 15 March 2017 which was  to  the
    effect that he has had intermittent in-patient  treatment.  The  report
    said that the appellant was "currently" experiencing low mood,  anxiety
    attacks and paranoia, and that he  takes  medication  in  the  form  of
    Olanzapine and Citalopram. She then said as follows:

             "The  appellant's  GP  states  that  the  appellant   requires
             'assistance when going out as he has become very  anxious  and
             stressed when out in  public'.  While  this  report  does  not
             comply  with  the  practice  direction  relating   to   expert
             evidence, I bear in mind the appellant has  no  representation
             in these proceedings and has poor mental health.  The  content
             of this letter has not been challenged by the  respondent  who
             acknowledges the appellant's mental  health  history.  In  the
             circumstances, I give significant evidential weight to the  GP
             report and accept its contents as an  accurate  representation
             of the appellant's treatment and day to day difficulties.  Its
             contents are consistent with the appellant's and his  nephew's
             account of having to  be  assisted  when  leaving  the  house,
             weekly medical appointments and monthly in-patient treatment."

49. The FtJ then referred to the appellant having various family members in
    the UK and living with his family. She found that one or  other  member
    of his family accompanies him when he goes out,  that  he  attends  for
    medical treatment once a week "and for in-patient hospital care once  a
    month". She referred to the evidence of the appellant's nephew  to  the
    effect that he is the appellant's primary carer albeit that they do not
    currently live together  because  the  appellant's  mother  suffered  a
    stroke earlier in the year and needs live-in care, and the nephew lives
    with her.

50. She concluded at [49] that if the  appellant  were  deported  he  would
    continue to require medication but would not have the benefit of family
    support that he would become stressed and anxious on return  and  would
    be unable to go out on his own. She found that the  evidence  does  not
    suggest that he is capable of living independently and is  not  capable
    of employment in Somalia. She further found that he would not have  the
    benefit of support from clan members on return to Mogadishu.

51. In the following paragraph the FtJ said that while family members would
    provide the appellant with financial support from the UK on his return,
    his mental health  was  such  that  even  if  he  was  able  to  access
    medication similar to that prescribed in the UK, he would be unable  to
    go out on his own to collect  the  funds  remitted  from  the  UK.  She
    referred to an aspect of the guidance in MOJ & Ors to the  effect  that
    help "is only likely to be forthcoming for majority  clan  members,  as
    minority clans may have little to offer".

52. Thus, the FtJ concluded that  the  appellant  would  have  to  live  in
    Mogadishu on his own without family or clan support. She found that  he
    would be at real risk of destitution irrespective of funds  being  sent
    from the UK. She also found  that  his  inability  to  go  out  without
    support also impacts on his ability to travel  from  Mogadishu  to  his
    home area in the south and that no family  or  clan  support  would  be
    available to him for such a journey.

53. At [51] she expressly stated that she did not accept  the  respondent's
    position as set out in the decision that his illness would not  prevent
    him from finding employment or accessing humanitarian  assistance.  She
    said that that was "wholly unrealistic" in the  light  of  the  medical
    evidence and the appellant's own account of his day-to-day life in  the
    UK. She concluded that he would be unable to find accommodation and  to
    maintain himself in practical terms even if  he  were  able  to  access
    funds remitted from the UK.

54. As to whether the appellant would be able to obtain treatment  for  his
    mental health, she referred to the background evidence relied on by the
    respondent (albeit stating that a WHO website could not  be  accessed).
    She concluded that there was no evidence  before  her  that  the  drugs
    currently prescribed for the appellant which keep his schizophrenia and
    depression under control, or similar medication, would be available  in
    Somalia.  She  found  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  counter   the
    appellant's evidence on the point.

55. She referred to evidence from the appellant's mother that the appellant
    was exhibiting unusual behaviour after his  father's  murder  and  that
    there was no suggestion that he was treated for that at the  time.  The
    FtJ then said  that  the  standard  of  care  available  in  all  other
    hospitals other than the two noted in  the  WHO  report  suggests  that
    appropriate treatment would  not  be  available  to  the  appellant  on
    return.

56. She thus concluded that:

             "there was a real risk of the appellant living  in  conditions
             that will fall below acceptable humanitarian  standards.  This
             is due to the appellant's minority  clan  membership  and  the
             resultant lack of support available to him."




    And that:

             "The appellant has therefore demonstrated he  is  entitled  to
             the grant of refugee status on the grounds of  his  ethnicity.
             The respondent's decision to deport him is  incompatible  with
             the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention. For similar
             reasons, the decision places the UK in breach of  Article  3."



57. She said finally that given those conclusions  she  had  not  addressed
    Article 8.

    Assessment

58. In considering the question of whether there is an error of law in  the
    decision of the FtJ, I have not taken into account  anything  that  was
    said by the appellant and FH which amounted  to  evidence  rather  than
    submissions as to error of law.

59. In relation to the issue of whether there is any error of  law  in  the
    FtJ's assessment of the appellant's nationality,  I  am  not  satisfied
    that the respondent's grounds have any merit. An  essential  ingredient
    of the FtJ's consideration of this issue was the appellant's account of
    events that are said to have taken place in Somalia, and the claim that
    the family sought refuge in Kenya thereafter.

60. The FtJ was very clear in her finding that both the appellant  and  his
    nephew were credible witnesses, although it is not clear what  evidence
    the appellant's nephew gave in relation to events in Somalia and Kenya.
    The FtJ gave clear reasons for concluding  that  the  appellant  was  a
    credible witness, as indicated by my summary of her findings. The FtJ's
    wholesale acceptance of the appellant's credibility could  be  open  to
    question on the basis that part of the appellant's evidence was that he
    did not commit the robbery for which he was convicted, and  her  having
    accepted his evidence that "he is a  law-abiding  person",  but  it  is
    tolerably clear that the FtJ's assessment of his credibility which  she
    relied on for her findings, was his evidence in relation to his time in
    Somalia and Kenya, as well as  his  personal/family  circumstances  and
    background.

61. Once the FtJ had found that the appellant's account was a credible one,
    and that account included having used a false Kenyan passport to travel
    to the UK, that could have been the end of the enquiry into  the  issue
    of his citizenship. I do not detect in the respondent's  arguments  any
    basis from which to conclude that the FtJ was not entitled to  find  as
    she did in relation to the appellant's credibility  in  general  terms.
    The general includes the specific in terms of his time in  Somalia  and
    Kenya and the use of a false Kenyan passport. The appellant's  evidence
    was that the passport was obtained through an agent whilst they were in
    the refugee camp in Kenya.

62. In any event, the FtJ went further. I have given a detailed summary  of
    what the FtJ said at [42] in relation to the passports and  the  letter
    from the Ministry in Kenya. The FtJ did not conclude that  that  letter
    established that the passports were not  authentic,  but  equally,  the
    letter did not say that they were genuine either.

63. The evidence that the appellant's mother has  been  recognised  by  the
    respondent as a refugee from Somalia is a matter that the FtJ could not
    simply ignore. She was bound to take it into account. Whilst of  course
    it is true that the granting or  revocation  of  refugee  status  is  a
    matter for the Secretary of State, the FtJ was  similarly  entitled  to
    take into account that the respondent has  not  sought  to  revoke  her
    refugee status on the basis that she is in  fact  Kenyan  (or  for  any
    other reason).

64. The decision of the FtJ to allow the appeal on refugee  and  Article  3
    grounds is rather more complex, not so much from  a  factual  point  of
    view, notwithstanding the respondent's criticisms of  some  aspects  of
    the FtJ's factual findings, but from a legal perspective.

65. There is nothing of substance in  the  respondent's  challenge  to  the
    FtJ's factual findings. Contrary to what is said in  the  grounds,  the
    FtJ did give clear reasons as to why the appellant would be unable  to,
    in effect, function independently in Mogadishu. She found that he would
    not be able to go out on his own to collect any funds remitted from the
    UK, and would have no-one there who would help him. With  the  guidance
    in MOJ & Ors in mind, she found that he would have no clan support. She
    further concluded that he would not be capable of finding employment or
    accommodation. Again, I have given a summary of the FtJ's  findings  on
    all of these issues.

66. As regards the FtJ's consideration of the medical evidence specific  to
    the appellant, she assessed the information given in the  GP's  report,
    again as I have summarised above at [48]. It is plain that the FtJ  was
    aware of the limitations of the evidence from the  GP.  She  took  into
    account that the evidence in that report was not challenged  on  behalf
    of the respondent, and that  its  contents  were  consistent  with  the
    evidence of the appellant and his nephew.

67. The respondent's criticism of this aspect of the FtJ's decision is,  it
    must be said, rather difficult to follow. The criticism that the GP  is
    not an expert in schizophrenia does not reveal any flaw  in  the  FtJ's
    reasoning. Nothing in the FtJ's findings touches on any  dispute  about
    whether or not the appellant suffers from  schizophrenia,  if  that  is
    what that aspect of the complaint in the grounds is directed to.  There
    does not appear to have been any dispute about the fact and  nature  of
    his mental disorder. The FtJ  was  perfectly  entitled  to  attach  the
    weight that she saw fit to the report in terms of it  stating  that  he
    suffers  from  paranoid  schizophrenia  (not  disputed)  and   of   his
    description of his treatment and  day-to-day  difficulties,  which  was
    consistent with the oral evidence that she heard.

68. The medical evidence before  the  FtJ  was  less  than  ideal,  as  she
    acknowledged, but such is often the case in such appeals,  particularly
    where an appellant is not legally represented. In my judgement the  FtJ
    was entitled to make the findings that  she  did  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's personal circumstances and in relation  to  his  day-to-day
    living.

69. Further, she made sustainable factual findings in relation to what were
    reasonably likely to be the  appellant's  circumstances  on  return  to
    Somalia, specifically Mogadishu, finding that he  would  be  unable  to
    find employment, accommodation or access humanitarian assistance, or be
    able to access any remittances that may be forthcoming from the UK. She
    made those findings in line with the decision in MOJ & Ors to which she
    referred extensively and which she plainly had at the forefront of  her
    mind when coming to her conclusions.

70. It is true that the FtJ did not refer to the issue  of  what  financial
    assistance may be available to the appellant under what is described in
    the grounds as the  Facilitated  Returns  Scheme.  This  was  a  matter
    considered in MOJ & Ors at [329] and [423], in which it was  said  that
    financial assistance from the Home Office may be available to voluntary
    returnees, in the form of a grant of up to �1,500, and which may be  of
    significant assistance to a returnee. However, that omission is  hardly
    significant in the context of the FtJ's findings about the  appellant's
    ability to manage independently.

71. As to what medical treatment may  be  available  to  the  appellant  in
    Mogadishu, the respondent does not take issue with the  FtJ's  findings
    in terms of whether the medication that he is presently receiving would
    be available to him. The respondent could, it seems to me, have  sought
    to argue that the medication that the appellant  is  receiving  is  not
    unusual in terms of treatment for mental disorders,  although  she  has
    not sought  to  do  so.  However,  there  is  of  course  more  to  the
    appellant's treatment than the medication he is receiving, as is  clear
    from the evidence that was before the FtJ.

72.  In  principle,  I  agree  with  the  respondent's  argument   that   a
    differential in treatment is not a basis  upon  which  a  person  could
    succeed in an Article 3 claim. The authorities on this point  are  very
    clear. However, I do not interpret the FtJ's decision as  meaning  that
    she found for the appellant in terms of Article 3 on  the  basis  of  a
    differential in treatment, although she considered  it  as  a  relevant
    factor in her overall assessment of the conditions in which he would be
    living if returned.

73. Nevertheless, there is within the respondent's grounds a complaint that
    is succinctly expressed but not given the prominence that  it  deserves
    in the challenge to the FtJ's decision. That is the contention that the
    FtJ was wrong to allow the appeal on asylum grounds on the basis of the
    appellant's minority clan status. She said at [54] that  the  appellant
    had "demonstrated he is entitled to the grant of refugee status on  the
    grounds of his ethnicity. The respondent's decision to  deport  him  is
    incompatible with the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention".

74. The respondent is right in suggesting that the Tribunal in  MOJ  &  Ors
    rejects the notion that minority clan status is sufficient to  found  a
    claim to refugee status so far as return to Mogadishu is concerned.

75. Before returning to this point, I consider the  respondent's  arguments
    relying on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Said.  To  summarise,
    the point advanced is that the appellant in that case also  had  mental
    health problems and it was concluded that that  was  not  a  sufficient
    basis from which his appeal should have been  allowed  in  terms  of  a
    return to Mogadishu.

76. For the point that the respondent relies on Said, I  am  not  satisfied
    that it has merit. Reliance on the facts  of  one  case  to  support  a
    conclusion that another appellant's case is so similar as to demand the
    same outcome is an  approach  that  I  consider  demands  a  degree  of
    caution. In any event,  a  reading  of  Said  reveals  a  significantly
    different factual matrix. If nothing else, I only need I think to refer
    to the fact that the appellant in that case was from  a  majority  clan
    [5]. It was also an established fact that he  was  capable  of  working
    [5], [19]. There was every prospect that  he  would  be  provided  with
    financial aid from a large and supportive family in the UK, quite apart
    from the prospect of some assistance from his clan [19]. There  was  no
    reason  to  believe  that  he  could  not   receive   the   "relatively
    commonplace" medical treatment (for PTSD and  depression)  that  he  is
    receiving in the UK if returned to Mogadishu.  The  case  was  not,  in
    short, an Article 3 case.

77. The respondent does not, although could have, relied on the analysis in
    Said of what was said in MOJ & Ors at [408], namely:

             "It will, therefore, only be those  with  no  clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms."

78. Burnett LJ said as follows:

             "I am unable to accept that if a Somali national were able  to
             bring himself within the rubric of para  408,  he  would  have
             established that his removal to Somalia would breach article 3
             of the Convention. Such an approach would be inconsistent with
             the domestic and Convention jurisprudence  which  at  para  34
             UTIAC expressly understood itself to be following."

79. If the FtJ meant at [53] to rely on what was said at [408] of MOJ & Ors
    to support a conclusion that the appellant's case  met  the  Article  3
    threshold, and I consider that she probably did, in my view  she  erred
    in doing so, understandable though that error is.

80. I now return to the point about the appellant's ethnicity and  the  FtJ
    having said at [54] that the  appellant  is  entitled  to  a  grant  of
    refugee status on  the  grounds  of  his  ethnicity.  As  a  basis  for
    entitlement   to   refugee   status   in   Mogadishu,   absent    other
    considerations, that is an erroneous conclusion. In this respect  also,
    I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law.

81. However, I do not consider that either of the  errors  of  law  I  have
    identified are such as to require the decision to be set aside. That is
    because had there not been those errors the  outcome  would  inevitably
    have been the same.

82. The underlying error on the part of  the  FtJ,  with  respect  to  this
    experienced judge, was to have failed to recognise the essence  of  the
    task that  she  was  performing  in  assessing  the  viability  of  the
    appellant's return to Mogadishu. That was  essentially  a  question  of
    internal relocation.

83. I sought to obtain from Ms Isherwood an acceptance  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that the appellant would be at real risk of  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to his home area  of  Kismayo.  There  was  some
    reluctance on her part to give any commitment in that respect  (see  my
    [24] above). However, it is plain from the background evidence to which
    the FtJ referred, and that in the respondent's  bundle,  and  the  fact
    that the respondent has made it clear that as regards return to Somalia
    return would be to Mogadishu and Mogadishu  only,  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk on return to Kismayo on account of his  minority  clan
    status. It seems to me obvious that the respondent implicitly at  least
    accepts that to be the case.

84. The next question  then,  easily  stated  but  not  necessarily  easily
    resolved, is whether there is an internal relocation  option  available
    to the appellant. That, it seems to me, was in fact the  question  that
    the FtJ was considering when analysing the appellant's circumstances on
    return to Mogadishu, and a task which she performed with evident care.

85. Her conclusions in terms of the appellant's minority clan status,  lack
    of support or practical ability to  access  funds,  inability  to  find
    employment or accommodation, inability to live independently,  and  the
    (reasonably) likely prospect of his having to live in an IDP  camp  and
    his having to live in conditions falling below acceptable  humanitarian
    standards, are plainly conclusions that are directly  relevant  to  the
    issue of internal relocation to Mogadishu.

86. In AH (Sudan) v  Secretary  of  State  [2007]  UKHL  49,  Lord  Bingham
    referred to what he had said in Januzi v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, namely that:

           "The   decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all    relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the  claimant  and  his  country  of
           origin, must decide whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
           claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to do so . . . There is,  as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
           observed  in Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
           Department, [2002] 1WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of cases. The
           decision-maker must do his best to decide, on such  material  as
           is available, where on the spectrum the particular case falls  .
           . . All must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts."

87. I cannot see that the FtJ's factual findings, reached without any error
    of law, are such as would lead to any  other  conclusion  but  that  it
    would not be reasonable  and  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate to Mogadishu. On that basis she would  have  been
    bound  to  allow  the  appeal  on  Refugee  Convention   grounds,   and
    consequently on Article 3 grounds.

88. The issue to which I have referred at [77]-[79] in relation to what was
    said in Said about [408] of MOJ & Ors could not in fact have  made  any
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.

89. To conclude therefore, although there are errors of law  in  the  FtJ's
    decision in the respects to which I have referred, those errors of  law
    are not such as to require her decision to be set aside. After  a  very
    careful and thoughtful analysis of the facts, she came  to  conclusions
    that were open to her as to the circumstances that the appellant  would
    find himself in on return to Mogadishu.

90. Not forgetting that the appeal was in fact an appeal in relation to the
    respondent's decision to deport the appellant, the  FtJ  was  right  to
    find that he came within one  of  the  exceptions  to  the  deportation
    provisions of s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007, namely Exception 1 under
    s.33(2) (Refugee or Human rights Convention).

    Decision

91. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law but its decision is not set aside and its decision to
    allow the appeal on asylum grounds and under Article 3 of the  ECHR  is
    to stand.




Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek                                   11/03/18



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

