

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/11774/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on 21 November 2019                           |on 27 November 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    V A H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq,  from  the  KRG,  aged  24.   The
    respondent refused her claim on all grounds for reasons set  out  in  a
    letter dated 23 September  2018.   FtT  Judge  Farrelly  dismissed  her
    appeal by a decision promulgated on 30 April 2019.


 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on  grounds  of  1,
    errors in terms of risk due to having fled to join her husband  in  the
    UK, 2, errors in terms of section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act,  and  3,
    errors in terms of entry clearance.  The FtT refused  permission.   The
    appellant applied to the UT for permission, out of time.

 3. UT Judge Hanson declined to extend time to admit grounds 1 and 3, which
    he held to be unarguable.  He extended time and granted  permission  to
    argue ground 2 only, as  having  arguable  merit  relating  to  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act  and  failure  to  consider  "the  hypothetical
    situation of the child returning to the KRG".

 4. Ground 2 (i) challenges [37] of the FtT's decision, which said  it  was
    necessary to consider the likely position of the child if the appellant
    were not allowed to remain, and [40], which said that it would  not  be
    reasonable for the child to go to Iraq.  These are said to  be  errors,
    the correct question being whether it was reasonable for the  child  to
    leave the UK.

 5. Ground 2 (ii) says that findings at [37] on what  the  child  would  or
    would not do are not supported  by  evidence,  and  are  in  any  event
    irrelevant to whether it was reasonable for the child to leave the UK.

 6. Ground 2 (iii) is also directed  against  [37],  saying  that  findings
    there misapply the law, are inadequately reasoned or  irrational.   (Mr
    Winter in submissions did not press the  challenge  to  the  extent  of
    irrationality.)  The ground maintains that it cannot be reasonable  for
    the child to leave "where the family would be separated ...  and  where
    both the appellant's husband and child are British and have  the  right
    to remain"; and that the outcome is inconsistent with case law in  that
    "there were no strong reasons to stop direct contact between the  child
    and parents, where the child and [his] father are European nationals".

 7. Mr Winter said that ground 3,  although  permission  was  not  granted,
    raised a matter which  was  relevant  as  overlapping  with  ground  2,
    failure to consider  whether  there  was  a  sensible  reason  for  the
    appellant to return with her child to apply for  entry  clearance.   In
    making those submissions, he accepted that the appellant's prospects of
    being granted entry clearance  were  not  as  good  as  the  judge  had
    thought.  The appellant had  not  shown  she  could  meet  the  English
    language requirement (which is not arduous) but she had also failed  to
    show that financial requirements of the rules could be met.

 8. Representatives agreed that the leading cases on how  to  approach  the
    best interests of children, and on whether it is reasonable  to  expect
    them to leave the UK, mostly involve the departure of both parents.  Mr
    Winter suggested that the principal case where only one parent  was  to
    leave is ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 - to which the FtT referred
    at [33].


 9. Mr Winter's overall submission was that the  judge's  approach  to  the
    essential question was so muddled that the decision had to be set aside
    and remade.  For that purpose, he sought a fresh hearing in the FtT, at
    which further evidence was likely to be led.

10. Mr Govan submitted that it had never been the law, or the policy of the
    SSHD, that a UK citizen child could never be  expected  to  leave,  and
    that the issue was always to be decided on the facts of the  case.   He
    said  that  the  grounds  were  semantic  disagreements  with  selected
    passages.  The correct question was posed at [35], derived from KO  and
    others, approving EV (Philippines), "Is it  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to follow the parent with no right to remain to  the  country  of
    origin?"  Mr Govan observed that this  envisaged  the  child  departing
    with one parent, not necessarily two.

11. Mr Winter in reply said  that  section  117B(6)  raises  a  stand-alone
    question, not a balancing exercise with the  appellant's  circumvention
    of the immigration rules, and that the judge failed to explore what the
    parents would in fact do in the event of the appellant's removal.

12. I reserved my decision.

13. I am not persuaded that the judge lost sight of the  vital  issue.   To
    express himself in slightly different ways at different points is  only
    part of the overall assessment.

14. The criticism at ground 2 (i) of asking about the  likely  position  of
    the child on departure of the mother is only another way  of  exploring
    what the parents would do.   The judge cannot be wrong in both ways.

15. Any deficiency of findings about what the  appellant  and  her  husband
    would do is due to lack of evidence and their reluctance  to  face  the
    issue, not the fault of the judge.

16. There is no meaningful difference between asking whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for the child to go to Iraq,  when  that  is  the  practical
    alternative, rather than whether it was reasonable  for  the  child  to
    leave the UK.

17. There is nothing to suggest that the judge was  wrong  in  thinking  at
    [37] that in fact it was likely the child would go with its mother; and
    that was exactly the hypothesis on which a decision was required.

18. It is not axiomatic,  and  is  not  said  in  KO,  that  it  is  always
    unreasonable to expect a child to leave with a mother  if  the  husband
    and child are UK citizens.  All depends on the circumstances.

19. While each case turns ultimately on its own facts, some comparison with
    KO is instructive.  The father there was a UK national who could not be
    expected even to visit his children abroad.  The father  in  this  case
    was originally an Iraqi national.  Whether he retains that  citizenship
    was not explored, but is at least possible.  No reason was advanced why
    he might not visit or live in Iraq.

20. Contrary to ground 2(iii), this case does  not  involve  any  necessary
    separation of family members and does not "stop contact".

21. The evidence did not show that the appellant had a strong  prospect  of
    being granted entry clearance.  There is no reason to think  she  could
    not tackle the language test, but there was a void of evidence  on  the
    financial requirements.  This was not a Chikwamba case.   However,  any
    lack of clarity on that issue in the decision  is  immaterial,  as  the
    judge's conclusion stood either way - [39 - 40].

22. The grounds overstate the position for the appellant on the  facts  and
    on the law.  They do not show that the judge failed to ask the  correct
    question, or that he gave an answer which was not permitted by the case
    law, or which was unreasonable on the evidence presented.  The  grounds
    resolve into no more than disagreement.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

24. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  This decision is anonymised.


      [pic]

      22 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




