


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number PA/11163/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Liverpool
     Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 15th December 2017                        On 11th January 2018



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                     K Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Shah (Legal Representative, 786 Law Associates)
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant arrived in the UK on the 2nd of April 2016 and claimed
   asylum on arrival on the basis of her having converted from Islam to
   Christianity. The claim was rejected for the reasons given in the Refusal
   Letter of the 29th of September 2016. The Appellant's appeal against the
   decision of the Secretary of State was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Brookfield at Manchester on the 20th of February 2017 and dismissed in a
   decision promulgated on the 26th of February 2017.

2. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the UK but the
   application to the First-tier Tribunal was refused by First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Pedro on the 20th of June 2017. A renewed application to the Upper
   Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on the 8th of August
   2017 leading to the hearing in Liverpool, at the conclusion of the
   hearing I reserved the decision which now follows with reasons.

3. The Judge's findings are set out in paragraph 10 of the decision which
   itself runs to 38 sub-paragraphs. The grounds before the First-tier
   Tribunal Judge were under 4 points, the first is that the Judge failed to
   weigh all the evidence properly and in particular that of Reverend Hough
   and failed to weigh it in the round. Ground 2 was a variation on that
   theme in that it was argued that the Judge had failed to consider
   material parts of the evidence of the Reverend and in paragraph 10(xxx)
   observed that she did not have the supporting evidence that he had had.
   The third ground related to the Appellant's daughter's conversion which
   it was stated was not challenged by the Secretary of State. Fourthly the
   Judge was wrong to give weight to the fact that the Appellant gave a
   false name following advice from the agent. The renewed grounds added
   nothing to the original submissions.

4. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Finch observed that at
   paragraph (xxxii) it appeared that the Judge had failed to apply the
   correct test in assessing the Appellant's claim. It appeared that the
   Tribunal had not taken into account letters at pages 27 to 29 and failed
   to note that the evidence supported that of the Reverend. The genuineness
   of the Appellant's daughter's conversion had not been considered.


5. At the hearing the representatives made submissions which are set out in
   the Record of Proceedings and referred to where relevant below. There
   have been a number of cases in the Court of Appeal where and the approach
   to expert evidence and the role of reviewing courts have been considered.




6. In the case of Re M-W (Care proceedings: Expert Evidence) [2010] EWCA
   Civ 12 in paragraph 39 Wall LJ stated "I regard the following as trite
   propositions of law: (1) Experts do not decide cases Judges do. The
   expert's function is to advise the Judge; (2) The Judge is fully entitled
   to accept or reject expert opinion; (3) If the Judge decides to reject an
   expert's advice, he or she: a. Must have a sound basis on which to do so;
   and b. Must explain why that advice is being rejected; (4) Similar
   considerations arise when a Judge prefers one expert's evidence to that
   of another. Judges must explain why they prefer the evidence of A to that
   of B."


7. In AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 at paragraph 37 Ryder LJ noted
   that in other jurisdictions the use of experts to provide veracity
   assessments is discouraged as that is a matter for the Judge. In cases
   where religious conversion is claimed the guidelines in Dorodian
   (01/TH/01537) apply but such evidence has to be assessed bearing in mind
   that the final assessment is for the Judge and not supporting witnesses
   and that the Judge will have regard to a wider range of evidence.


8. Burnett LJ in EA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 10 at paragraph 27 gave made the
   following observations: "Decisions of tribunals should not become
   formulaic and rarely benefit from copious citation of authority.
   Arguments that reduce to the proposition that the First-tier Tribunal has
   failed to mention dicta from a series of cases in the Court of Appeal or
   elsewhere will rarely prosper. Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in
   Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read on
   the assumption that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the judge
   knew how he should perform his functions and which matters he should take
   into account". He added that an "appellate court should resist the
   temptation to subvert the principle that they should not substitute their
   own discretion for that of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which
   enables them to claim that he misdirected himself". Moreover, some
   principles are so firmly embedded in judicial thinking that they do not
   need to be recited. For example, it would be surprising to see in every
   civil judgment a paragraph dealing with the burden and standard of proof;
   or in every running down action a treatise, however short, on the law of
   negligence. That said, the reader of any judicial decision must be
   reassured from its content that the court or tribunal has applied the
   correct legal test to any question it is deciding."


9. With regard to the application of the standard of proof the Judge set
   out directions at paragraphs 4 to 6 and there is no suggestion that these
   were inaccurate or unreliable. As indicated in the case of EA narrow
   textual analysis is to be avoided and the decision is to be read as a
   whole. In my view the criticism of the Judge's wording in paragraph
   (xxxii) being unable to discount the probability that the Appellant and
   her daughter attending church to enhance the asylum claim could only work
   by the sort of narrow textual analysis deprecated by the Court of Appeal.
   Given the preceding findings that the Judge had set out that paragraph,
   read in context, is not an error and does not undermine the decision.


10. Paragraph 10(xxxii) is also relevant to whether the Appellant's
   daughter's position was addressed, the implication from the criticised
   wording is that the Judge did not accept that the Appellant's daughter's
   conversion was any more genuine than that of the Appellant. The focus of
   the decision was clearly on the position of the Appellant and her
   daughter was a dependent on the claim and so in a sense subsidiary to the
   position of the Appellant. The decision, read as a whole, is that the
   conversion was not accepted and that applied to both of them.


11. The main criticisms are in relation to the approach taken to the
   evidence of the Reverend Hough and the other evidence relied on in
   relation to the Appellant's claimed conversion. With all its sub-
   paragraphs paragraph 10 of the decision runs to over 8 pages, it cannot
   be described as superficial or lacking in analysis. Obviously length
   alone is not a guard against error but it can indicate that matters have
   been considered.


12. The Judge was entitled to have regard to the Appellant's use of false
   identities and the destruction of the passports and her evidence on that
   point as discussed in paragraphs 10 (xxii) to (xxv). Once in the UK it is
   difficult to see why the Appellant would have provided a false identity
   which in any event would be contrary to her obligations under the Refugee
   Convention to provide full assistance to the authorities in the country
   where refuge is sought. If the use of the false names on arrival is put
   to one side there was still a significant delay in the Appellant
   correcting that which was a relevant consideration. In any event the
   discussion of what was only a part of the evidence did not show that the
   Judge attached undue weight to it.


13. The Judge had considered the Appellant's evidence in relation to events
   in Iran in the preceding paragraphs. No issue has been taken with the
   Judge's approach as set out in those paragraphs and the findings and
   observations are relevant to the evidence of the Appellant's later
   actions. As noted above the decision is to be read as a whole. The
   evidence of the Reverend Hough did not stand in isolation and the Judge
   had the advantage of conducting a wider review of the Appellant's case.
   Again it cannot be said that undue weight was given to this aspect of the
   evidence but it was placed in the wider context and was part of the
   overall information that the Judge had to consider.


14. With regard to the approach to the evidence relating to the Appellant's
   activities in the UK and her claimed conversion (and that of her
   daughter) the evidence of the Reverend Hough was, like that of an expert,
   not determinative of the decision and had to be assessed in the usual
   way. The observation in paragraph (xxx) that he had relied on the input
   of others was correct and evidence had not been put before the Judge to
   show what that input was. It could not be equated with the letters of
   support submitted in the Appellant's bundle which were a relatively small
   part of the overall evidence. The Judge did not question the honesty of
   the view of the Appellant's conversion but was obliged to form her own
   view as to its genuineness which she did. In paragraph (xxxi) the Judge
   had regard to other credibility factors including the Appellant's claimed
   escape and medical claims and found against her, these findings have not
   been challenged and form part of the overall circumstances to be
   considered.


15. In summary the Appellant's claimed conversion whilst in the UK had to
   be assessed in the light of her claims of events in Iran, both in
   relation to her medical condition and tests, her interest in Christianity
   and claimed ability to escape with her medication - all relevant matters
   that the Judge discussed and considered. To those were added her coming
   to the UK, the use false identities and the delay in correcting that and
   then her claimed conversion. The decision has to be read as a whole, in
   doing so I am satisfied that the Judge did not unduly concentrate on any
   one part of the evidence or ignore evidence that was pertinent. An
   analysis of the decision shows that the Judge properly considered the
   Appellant's case and gave sustainable reasons for the findings made. The
   decision does not contain any errors of law.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 10 January 2018









