
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/11514/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 August 2017                     |      On 7 September 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     JK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Greater London Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Andonian  promulgated  on  19  April  2017  in  which  he
    dismissed his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  10
    October 2016 to refuse an asylum and protection claim.

 2. The applicant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, of Tamil ethnicity.  His  case
    is that despite having left the country in 2007 that he is now at  risk
    on return as a result of  cases  which  appear  to  have  been  brought
    against him arising from the fact that his father recently got  into  a
    dispute over land.   These  are  referred  to  in  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's father's solicitor in Sri Lanka which was  written  to  the
    appellant's solicitors in the United Kingdom, that letter sets  out  in
    significant detail the nature of the dispute and how the cases has come
    about, it also attaches certified copies of  various  court  documents.
    These are, I am satisfied, of the nature of the documents  referred  to
    in PJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1411.

 3. I consider that in the circumstances of  this  case  that  the  judge's
    dismissal of the letters at  paragraph  5  is  inadequate.   He  simply
    states that he has seen the documents  with  English  translation,  but
    does not say exactly what they are, nor does he give, in light  of  the
    fact that these documents did not emanate from the  appellant  himself,
    but rather from letters exchanged between his solicitors and lawyers in
    Sri Lanka.  There is no proper attempt to apply Tanveer Ahmed to  these
    cases, nor for that matter properly to apply the principles set out  in
    PJ (Sri Lanka) and I consider that this amounts to an error of law.

 4. Given that this goes primarily to the credibility of the appellant  and
    it undermines all the findings of fact made by the First-tier  Tribunal
    I am satisfied that the decision must be set  aside  and  none  of  the
    findings of fact are preserved.  I am therefore satisfied that  in  the
    circumstances it is appropriate to remit the decision to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  on
    all issues.

 3. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal


Signed                                  Date:  6 September 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



