
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11934/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th October 2020                         |On 5th March 2021             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                    E T G
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Tapfumaneyi, PT Law & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), and as
this decision concerns the interests of minor children, it is appropriate
that a direction is made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs
otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No report of these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his
family.  This direction applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Farmer promulgated on 18th March 2020.  The underlying decision that
      was the subject of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was the
      decision of the respondent dated 28th September 2019 to refuse the
      appellant's human rights claim.


   2. The hearing before me on 13th October 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using Skype for Business. Neither party objected.  At the
      outset, I was informed by Mr Tapfumaneyi that the appellant was
      feeling unwell and has asked that his attendance be excused.  I sat at
      the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was addressed by the
      representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been if the
      parties had attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that no
      party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any
      restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and
      proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of
      justice and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed
      with a remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions
      against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied
      that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and
      justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case,
      the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


   3. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  The appellant's immigration
      history is referred to in the respondent's decision and as set out in
      paragraph [3] of the decision of Judge Farmer, is uncontroversial.
      For present purposes it is sufficient to note that on 29th March 2011,
      the appellant was granted Discretionary Leave to Remain in the UK
      valid until 15th March 2014 following a successful appeal on Article 8
      grounds, after a claim for international protection and leave to
      remain on human rights grounds was refused by the respondent in
      January 2011.  At the hearing of the appeal, the appellant relied upon
      his relationship with a British Citizen who I shall refer to in this
      decision as [DO] and the two children of that relationship who I refer
      to as [M] and [T] respectively.  [M] was born on 2nd October 2018 and
      [T] was born on 20th November 2009.


   4. Having referred, at paragraph [7] of her decision to the cautions
      received by the appellant in 2005, 2006 and 2007, at paragraph [8] of
      her decision, Judge Farmer referred to the appellant's criminal
      convictions.  She said:


         "His PNC discloses 17 convictions for 29 offences between 23
         January 2008 and 23 May 2019.  These are summarised as 2 offences
         against the person (2009); 2 offences against property (2009); 8
         theft and kindred offences (2013 - 2019); 4 public order offences
         (2008 - 2019) and 1 miscellaneous offence (2015)."


   5. At paragraph [9], Judge Farmer noted the appellant had received a
      combination of community sentences, fines and compensation orders
      until 2015 when he was convicted (following a guilty plea) at Woolwich
      Crown Court of 1 count of theft and 1 count of robbery.  He was
      sentenced to 2 months and 18 months respectively, to run concurrently.
       At paragraph [10], Judge Farmer referred to the appellant's more
      recent convictions.  She said:


         "...On 28/03/2019 he was convicted of theft and given a community
         sentence which was subsequently varied to 10 weeks imprisonment on
         23/05/2019.  On 10/04/2019 he was convicted of possession of a
         Class A drug (cocaine) and given one week imprisonment to run
         consecutively with one week's imprisonment for an offence on the
         same date of possession of a Class B drug (cannabis).  At the same
         time he was sentenced for theft (from a motor vehicle) and given 20
         weeks imprisonment."


   6. Judge Farmer noted, at [14], that on 2nd August 2015 the appellant was
      served with a decision to deport dated 29th July 2015.  Submissions
      were made on the appellant's behalf by his representatives on 27th of
      August 2015.  On 22nd December 2015 the respondent wrote to the
      appellant's representatives requesting further documents. No further
      documents were provided by the appellant and on 20th September 2019
      the respondent reached her decision to refuse the appellant's human
      rights claim. It was that decision that was the subject of the appeal
      before First-tier Tribunal Judge Farmer.


   7. At the hearing of the appeal, there was an application by the
      appellant's representative for an adjournment to obtain an up-to-date
      medical report to deal with the effects of a head injury the appellant
      suffered in 2007. The application was refused for the reasons set out
      in paragraph [16] of the decision.


   8. At paragraph [21] of the decision, Judge Farmer records that the
      appellant attended the hearing and gave oral evidence.  She states
      that there is a full note of his evidence in the record of proceedings
      and continues "... I will summarise it as follows:".  Regrettably,
      what follows as a summary of the appellant's claim at paragraphs [22]
      to [25] of the decision bears no resemblance whatsoever to the
      appellant's claim. The facts and circumstances recorded in those
      paragraphs do not relate to the appellant at all and are wholly
      divorced from the facts and circumstances of the appellant's case.  At
      paragraph [26], Judge Farmer states the appellant's wife also gave
      oral evidence and confirmed the account given by the appellant.  That
      paragraph also has nothing to do with this appeal. The appellant does
      not have a partner and the Tribunal did not hear from any other
      witnesses.  I have considered in the course of this decision whether
      the erroneous summary that relates to another individual, was material
      to the outcome of the appeal.


   9. Judge Farmer's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [27]
      to [64] of her decision. At paragraph [28] of her decision Judge
      Farmer correctly noted that the appellant has made a human rights
      claim based on his relationship with his British children.  At
      paragraph [30] she noted that the issue for her, is the weight to be
      placed on the competing interests of the respondent to deport the
      appellant in the public interest on the basis that his presence in the
      UK is not conducive to the public good, and the appellant's claim to
      have a family life with his children.  Judge Farmer set out the
      relevant provisions of the immigration rules at paragraphs [31] to
      [35] of her decision.


  10. Judge Farmer referred to the evidence that was before Immigration
      Judge Lewis previously when is appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds
      for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 17th March 2011.  She
      noted, at paragraph [40] of her decision, that [DO] attended the
      hearing in 2011 and gave evidence in support of the appeal. She noted
      the appellant's sister had also given evidence in support of the
      appeal in 2011.  Judge Farmer referred to the lack of evidence
      regarding the appellant's ongoing relationship with his children, and
      at paragraph [43] she said:


         "Although the appellant claims to have ongoing regular contact with
         his children I find that he has not established to the required
         standard (on balance of probabilities) that he has any ongoing
         direct contact with them."


  11. At paragraph [48] she said:


         "The Determination of IJ Lewis in 2011 found an ongoing
         relationship with his British children. Based on the current and
         new evidence I am entitled to come to a different conclusion, and I
         find there is no ongoing relationship."


  12. Nevertheless, Judge Farmer found, at [52], that it would be unduly
      harsh for the children to live in Zimbabwe.  That had been conceded by
      the respondent in the respondent's decision.  She found, at [53], that
      it would not be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK
      without their father. She found the appellant is not currently having
      direct contact with them and their primary carer is their mother, with
      whom they continue to live. She acknowledged that the removal of the
      appellant will have an impact on the children, and it will mean that
      they are unable to reinstate direct contact, but she found they will
      be able to maintain indirect contact and would be able to visit their
      father in Zimbabwe in the future. She concluded, at [55], it would not
      be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without the
      appellant.


  13. Judge Farmer also concluded that paragraph 399A of the immigration
      rules does not apply because the appellant has not been resident in
      the UK for most of his life, is not socially and culturally integrated
      in the UK and there would not be very significant obstacles to his
      integration into Zimbabwe.  Having concluded that the exceptions to
      deportation are not satisfied, she found, at [62], that there is a
      significant public interest in deporting the appellant due to the fact
      that he has 17 convictions for 29 offences. She found the appellant
      has failed to provide evidence to establish that the public interest
      in deportation is outweighed by other factors.  At paragraph [64] she
      referred to the appellant's claim that he would suffer undue hardship
      because of his medical condition. She referred to the medical evidence
      before the Tribunal and noted the appellant has been prescribed an
      antidepressant and one other medication but is receiving no other
      therapy. She noted that while tests show an impairment of the
      appellant's cognitive function, the health professionals observed no
      apparent impairment of his functional ability.  Judge Farmer concluded
      that if the appellant requires treatment, there is a healthcare system
      available to him in Zimbabwe.  Although that would not provide the
      level of care that the NHS provides, Judge Farmer was not satisfied
      that the appellant needs, or has, a high level of current need. Having
      considered the evidence before the tribunal she concluded that the
      public interest in deporting the appellant outweighs his right to a
      family and private life.


The appeal before me


  14. The appellant claims Judge Farmer erred:


        a. in failing to grant the application for an adjournment and
           relied upon outdated medical evidence, and made adverse
           credibility findings in circumstances where there was evidence
           of impairment of the appellant's cognitive function capable of
           explaining his inability to recollect events; and/or


        b. in failing to consider the appellant's claim that he would be at
           risk upon return to Zimbabwe because of his imputed political
           opinion; and/or


        c. in failing to give sufficient and adequate reasons for the
           finding that the appellant does not have a genuine and
           subsisting parental relationship with his children when
           considering whether paragraph 399 of the immigration rules
           applies.


  15. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Robertson on 23rd July 2020.


  16. In his submissions Mr Tapfumaneyi relied on the grounds of appeal and
      submitted that Judge Farmer erroneously refused the application for an
      adjournment in circumstances where the appellant's health impacted on
      his ability to provide evidence in support of the appeal. The
      application for an adjournment was made to enable the appellant to
      obtain further medical evidence in support of his claim and to allow
      for further time to obtain evidence to support the Article 8 claim
      made.  Mr Tapfumaneyi submits Judge Farmer erroneously recorded, at
      paragraph [16], that the sole basis for the application for an
      adjournment was to obtain an up-to-date medical report and the failure
      to record the reasons for the application is of concern. He submits
      the appellant had been serving a sentence of imprisonment and then was
      held in immigration detention until he was released on 21st January
      2020.   He had suffered mental health relapses and his family had been
      unable to support him.  However at the end of February 2020/beginning
      of March 2020, the appellant's sister had agreed to fund a medical
      report, and that is why an application was made for an adjournment.


  17. Mr Tapfumaneyi submits the appellant did not have sufficient time
      following his release from detention to obtain the evidence necessary
      to support the Article 8 claim.  He said the appellant could not
      secure a statement from his siblings, because they would not agree to
      support the application. His estranged partner, [DO], was not willing
      to cooperate with the appellant and was not prepared to provide a
      statement in support of the appeal. Mr Tapfumaneyi accepts the two
      children [M] and [T] remain in the care of their mother who has sole
      responsibility for them. The appellant had been unable to obtain
      evidence from the children's schools to confirm that he had remained
      in contact with the schools prior to his incarceration, without the
      consent of [DO].  Mr Tapfumaneyi simply submits the appellant did not
      have sufficient time to provide evidence regarding his ongoing
      involvement in the lives of the children. He submits Judge Farmer
      unfairly failed to give the appellant an opportunity to provide
      further evidence in support of the Article 8 claim when there was
      evidence of a previous relationship between the appellant and his
      children.


  18. Mr Tapfumaneyi submits Judge Farmer has failed to have any regard to
      the claim for international protection made by the appellant. He
      referred to the appellant's statement dated 13th March 2020 that is to
      be found at pages [13] to [16] of the appellant's bundle. In his
      statement the appellant claims he does not support ZANU-PF, and if he
      has to return to Zimbabwe, he will denounce the government.  He fears
      that he will be targeted and refers to background material that he
      claims establishes that even low-level members of political parties
      such as the MDC and pressure groups in Zimbabwe are at risk.  Mr
      Tapfumaneyi accepts the appellant is not a member of the MDC and has
      no political profile. He candidly accepts that a claim for
      international protection could not succeed under the Country Guidance
      set out in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013]
      UKUT 00059(IAC), but he submits, there was background material before
      the First-tier Tribunal that was sufficient to establish the appellant
      would be at risk upon return.


  19. In reply, Mrs Aboni submits Judge Farmer properly directed herself and
      gave adequate reasons for the findings and conclusions she reached.
      She accepts that at paragraphs [22] to [26] of the decision, Judge
      Farmer summarises a claim that appears to relate to a different
      individual altogether.  She submits that demonstrates a lack of care
      but is not material to the outcome of the appeal.  She submits Judge
      Farmer engages with the evidence and reaches findings and conclusions
      at paragraphs [27] to [64], that were open to her on the evidence
      before the Tribunal.


  20. Mrs Aboni submits the application for an adjournment was made at the
      hearing and dealt with as a preliminary matter.  The application was,
      as Judge Farmer recorded, made on the sole basis that the appellant
      wished to obtain an up-to-date medical report to deal with the effect
      of the appellant's head injury.  There was no suggestion that an
      adjournment was required to get evidence of the relationship between
      the appellant and his children and to support the Article 8 claim.  In
      any event, she submits, there is no proper no explanation for the
      failure to file and serve evidence in support of the Article 8 claim.
      Mrs Aboni submits it was open to the Judge to refuse the application
      for an adjournment for the reasons given.


  21. Insofar as the appellant relies upon a claim for international
      protection, Mrs Aboni submits that the decision that was the subject
      of the appeal was a decision to refuse a human rights claim. The
      appellant had not made a claim for international protection.  It had
      not been claimed in the representations made on his behalf that the
      appellant would be at risk upon return to Zimbabwe because of is
      imputed political opinion, or that his removal from the UK would be in
      breach of the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention.


Discussion


  22. Before addressing the appellant's appeal it is useful to refer to the
      relevant statutory framework. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007
      defines a foreign criminal, as a person not a British citizen who is
      convicted in the UK of an offence and, inter alia, sentenced to a
      period of imprisonment of at least 12 months. Section 32(4) of the
      2007 Act sets outs out the clear proposition that deportation of a
      foreign criminal is conducive to the public good. That is a statement
      of public policy enacted by the legislature, which the courts and
      tribunals are obliged to respect. Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act
      requires the Secretary of State to make a deportation order in respect
      of every foreign criminal, subject to the exceptions set out in
      section 33.  Insofar as is relevant that is:


         "(2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-


             (a)  a person's Convention rights, or


             (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
         Convention.


             ...


    (7) The application of an exception-


             (a) does not prevent the making of a deportation order.


             (b) results in it being assumed neither that deportation of
             the person concerned is conducive to the public good nor that
             it is not conducive to the public good.


             but section 32(4) applies despite the application of Exception
          1 or 4.".


  23. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  NIAA 2002
       informs the decision making in relation to the application of the
      section 33 exceptions. Section 117A in Part 5A provides that, when a
      court or tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made
      under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to respect for
      private and family life under Article 8, and, as a result, would be
      unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998, the court, in considering
      the public interest question, must (in particular) have regard to the
      considerations listed in section 117B and, additionally, in cases
      concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the considerations
      listed in section 117C.  Applying s117C(3) of the 2002 Act, the public
      interest required the appellant's deportation unless Exceptions 1 or 2
      set out in s.117C(4) and (5) apply.


The decision to refuse the application for an adjournment


  24. I accept that a decision which is procedurally unfair is erroneous in
      law and must be set aside: Serafin v Malkiewicz [2020] UKSC 23.  In
      Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 000418 (IAC), the Upper
      Tribunal held that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment
      request, such decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in
      several respects. In practice, in most cases the question will be
      whether the refusal deprived the affected party of their right to a
      fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness
      grounds, it is important to recognise that the question for the Upper
      Tribunal is not whether the FtT acted reasonably. Rather, the test to
      be applied is that of fairness.  There is no requirement to show bad
      faith on the part of the Judge below, and whether a particular course
      was fair or not, is necessarily a question of law that is entirely
      fact sensitive.


  25. I reject the claim that First-tier Tribunal Judge Farmer unfairly
      refused the application for an adjournment.  As Judge Farmer noted at
      paragraph [11] of her decision, the appellant had instructed his
      current solicitors on 29th November 2019.  He was released from
      immigration detention, on bail, on 21st January 2020. The appellant
      and his representatives were served with a 'Notice of Hearings' on
      24th January 2020.  The Notice informed the appellant and his
      representatives that a Case Management Review Hearing would take place
      on 12th February 2020 and the appeal had been listed for a full
      hearing on 12th March 2020.  Mr Tapfumaneyi appeared on behalf of the
      appellant at the Case Management Review Hearing on 12th February 2020
      before First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell.  The Directions made at the
      Case Management Review Hearing were sent to the parties on 13th
      February 2020.  The Directions confirmed that the substantive hearing
      of the appeal was to remain listed on 12th March 2020.  The appellant
      was directed to file and serve a full and paginated bundle of evidence
      relied upon no later than five days prior to the substantive hearing.


  26. For reasons that are neither explained nor apparent, there was no
      application for an adjournment prior to the hearing of the appeal on
      12th March 2020.  It was of course open to the appellant to raise any
      difficulties that were being encountered in securing evidence,
      including medical evidence, at the Case Management Review hearing and
      to canvass with the Tribunal the possibility of relisting the appeal
      on another date. The appellant did not do so. It was equally open to
      the appellant to make an application for an adjournment as soon as it
      became apparent that further medical evidence would be of assistance,
      or that the appellant felt he had insufficient time to secure evidence
      in support of his Article 8 claim.  Again, the appellant did not do
      so.  The issues in the appeal are plainly apparent from the matters
      set out in the respondent's decision.


  27. I have considered the record of proceedings in which First-tier Judge
      Farmer refers to the application for an adjournment.  It is clear from
      the record of proceedings that the application was, as recorded in
      paragraph [16] of her decision, made on the sole basis that the
      appellant wished to obtain an up-to-date medical report to deal with
      the effect of the head injury the appellant had suffered in 2007.  At
      paragraph [16] of her decision, Judge Farmer said:


         "... I refused the adjournment. This is a very old injury, now
         almost 13 years ago. There is a wealth of medical evidence before
         the Tribunal including contemporaneous evidence and reports, GP
         print outs and records from 2005 to 2014 and additional medical
         letters. I also have the findings of Immigration Judge Lewis ("IJ
         Lewis") who dealt with the injury in his determination promulgated
         on 17 March 2011 and the sentencing remarks in 2015 which also
         referred to the injury and the OYAS report which also makes
         reference to it. I find that there is therefore no need to adjourn
         the appeal when there is already so much material available and I
         found that I could have a fair hearing without further evidence
         being required. I therefore refused to adjourn as I could have a
         fair hearing and it was neither proportionate or in the interests
         of justice for there to be further delay."


  28. I reject the submission, made by Mr Tapfumaneyi that fairness required
      an adjournment. The appellant had attended the hearing of the appeal
      and, as Judge Farmer noted, there was a wealth of evidence before the
      Tribunal regarding the injury suffered by the appellant in 2007 and
      its impact upon the appellant.  In my judgment, Judge Farmer gives
      entirely proper reasons for refusing the application.  Nothing more
      was required, and I reject the submission that the judge was required,
      on the facts of this case to adjourn to enable further medical
      evidence to be secured.  It is in my judgement plain that Judge Farmer
      had the relevant facts and the relevant considerations in mind.  As
      the chronology that I have set out above demonstrates, the appellant
      had had ample time to obtain further medical evidence in support of
      his appeal but had failed to do so in a timely fashion.  Fairness did
      not demand that the hearing be adjourned in these circumstances, and
      the appellant, who had been legally represented since the end of
      November 2019, should have appreciated the issues that would arise in
      the appeal.


Failure to consider the appellant's claim that he would be at risk upon
return to Zimbabwe because of his imputed political opinion


  29. The appellant was served with a notice of decision to make a
      deportation order dated 29th of July 2015. He was invited to set out
      any reasons he has for wishing to remain in the UK.  Representations
      were made on behalf of the appellant by William Lamb & Co under cover
      of a letter dated 27th August 2015.  A copy of that letter is to be
      found at 'Annex K' of the respondent's bundle.  The appellant's
      representatives did not suggest the appellant's removal in pursuance
      of a deportation order would be in breach of the Refugee Convention.
      The appellant's representatives relied entirely upon his relationship
      with members of his family in the UK, and in particular, his
      relationship with his two children who are British citizens. I accept,
      as Ms Aboni submits, that the decision that was the subject of the
      appeal was a decision to refuse a human rights claim made in response
      to the representations made on behalf of the appellant.


  30. In the appellant's grounds of appeal that were before the First-tier
      Tribunal, the appellant claimed, for the first time, that his
      deportation would be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations
      under the Refugee Convention.  In Mahmud (S85 NIAA 2002 - "new
      matters") [2017] UKUT 488 (IAC) it was held that (i) Whether something
      is or is not a 'new matter' goes to the jurisdiction of the First-tier
      Tribunal in the appeal and the First-tier Tribunal must therefore
      determine for itself the issue; (ii) A 'new matter' is a matter which
      constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as
      required by section 85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act. Constituting a ground of
      appeal means that it must contain a matter which could raise or
      establish a listed ground of appeal. A matter is the factual substance
      of a claim. A ground of appeal is the legal basis on which the facts
      in any given matter could form the basis of a challenge to the
      decision under appeal; (iii) In practice, a new matter is a factual
      matrix which has not previously been considered by the Secretary of
      State in the context of the decision in section 82(1) or a statement
      made by the appellant under section 120. This requires the matter to
      be factually distinct from that previously raised by an appellant, as
      opposed to further or better evidence of an existing matter. The
      assessment will always be fact sensitive.  The appellant made the
      broad assertion in the grounds of appeal that the "removal of the
      appellant will breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee
      Convention".  He simply claimed that he was interviewed by staff from
      the Zimbabwean Embassy on 28th November 2019, when details of his
      family in Zimbabwe and the UK were taken by the officials. It was said
      that the ".. Appellant fears to return to Zimbabwe, the situation has
      not changed and has nowhere else to go..".


  31. The respondent had not given consent to the new matter being
      considered and unless and until the respondent expressly gives consent
      for the consideration of a new matter by the Tribunal, an appellant
      must be aware the issues may not be considered.  There is no power for
      the First-tier Tribunal, or the Upper Tribunal to determine whether
      the respondent has appropriately or fairly withheld consent.  It is
      plainly unfortunate that the matter was not addressed by the parties
      either at the Case Management Review or at the hearing of the appeal
      as a preliminary matter.  If the Tribunal had considered the new
      matter without the SSHD giving consent for it to do so, it would have
      been acting outside its jurisdiction.  I therefore reject the claim
      that Judge Farmer erred in failing to determine whether removal of the
      appellant in pursuance of the deportation order would breach the
      appellant's Convention rights.


Failing to give sufficient and adequate reasons for the finding that the
appellant does not have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
his children


  32. At paragraphs [36] to [44] Judge Farmer carefully consider the
      evidence before the Tribunal regarding the appellant's relationship
      with his children. She noted, at [36], that the evidence is historic,
      and given the evidence of the appellant, it is surprising that more up-
      to-date evidence had not been produced. She noted that is particularly
      so in circumstances where the respondent had repeatedly asked the
      appellant to provide evidence of his ongoing relationship with his
      children and had criticised the appellant for failing to provide it in
      the respondent's decision.


  33. I reject the claim that Judge Farmer failed to give adequate reasons
      for finding that the appellant has failed to establish to the required
      standard, that he has ongoing direct contact with the children.  In
      reaching her decision, Judge Farmer referred to the previous decision
      of Immigration Judge Lewis promulgated in 2011 in which the Judge
      found there to be an ongoing relationship between the appellant and
      his children. It was the lack of any evidence to establish ongoing
      contact, that in the end, led Judge Farmer to conclude that the
      appellant does not have any ongoing direct contact with them.


  34. In MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 the Court of Appeal
      confirmed  that adequacy meant no more nor less than that. It was not
      a counsel of perfection. Still less should it provide an opportunity
      to undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to see if they
      are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits. The purpose of
      the duty to give reasons, is in part, to enable the losing party to
      know why he or she has lost and it is also to enable an appellate
      court or tribunal to see what the reasons for the decision are so that
      they can be examined in case there has been an error of approach.  The
      assessment of such a claim is always a highly fact sensitive task.
      Judge Farmer was required to consider the evidence that was before the
      First-tier Tribunal as a whole, and she plainly did so, giving
      adequate reasons for her decision.  The findings and conclusions
      reached by the judge are neither irrational nor unreasonable.  The
      decision was one that was open to the judge on the evidence before her
      and the findings made.


  35. It follows that in my judgement it was open to Judge Farmer to dismiss
      the appeal for the reasons set out in her decision.  I have considered
      whether the erroneous factual summary set out in paragraphs [22] to
      [26] of the decision was material to the outcome of the appeal. It was
      unfortunate, and as the parties agree, careless.  However, at
      paragraphs [27] to [64] of the decision Judge Farmer sets out her
      findings and conclusions, and it is clear that she carefully engaged
      with the claim advanced by the appellant.  The findings and
      conclusions are rooted in the claim that was advanced by the appellant
      and the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I am
      satisfied that in reaching her decision Judge Farmer did not address
      the appeal on the basis of anything said in the erroneous factual
      summary. I am entirely satisfied that she properly addressed the
      appellant's appeal and the evidence that was before the Tribunal, such
      that the reference to an erroneous factual summary, was not material
      to the outcome of the appeal.


  36. I reject the appellant's grounds of appeal and the appeal is
      dismissed.





Notice of Decision


  37. The appeal is dismissed, and the decision of FtT Judge Farmer
      promulgated on 18th March 2020 stands.


  38. I continue the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed   V. Mandalia                Date:    14th December 2020
      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
