
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    PA/11533/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 5 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     K K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. FtT Judge  Powell  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 December 2018.  On 20 August 2020, the  FtT  extended
    time and granted permission to appeal to the UT.

 2. In response to the grant of permission and  the  UT's  directions,  the
    SSHD concedes that the FtT erred  on  whether  the  appellant's  uncle,
    referred to in the evidence, was on his maternal or paternal side.  The
    error appears to have originated not  from  the  judge,  but  from  the
    appellant's "lay representative" or "McKenzie friend".

 3. The error had some bearing on the outcome.  The SSHD concedes  that  it
    is material, and proposes a remit to the FtT.

 4. Surprisingly, perhaps, there is nothing on file from the  appellant  in
    response to directions; but it is possible to resolve  the  case  under
    rules 2 and 34, without a hearing.

 5. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and stands only as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  Under section 12 of the  2007  Act,  and
    under Practice Statement 7.2, the case is remitted to  the  FtT  for  a
    fresh hearing, not before Judge Powell.

 6. The FtT's anonymity direction is maintained at this stage.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    30 October 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

