








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11417/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 30 January 2019                  |On: 6 February 2019                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                                    [I I]
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, counsel, instructed by UK Lawyers and
                    Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Egypt, born on 10 July 1993. He appeals
      with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Stedman, promulgated  on  14  November  2018,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision dated 11 September  2018  to  refuse
      his asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claims.

   2. In granting the appellant permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Doyle stated that  it  is  arguable  that  the  refusal  of  the
      adjournment sought by the appellant's counsel at his hearing prevented
      the appellant from presenting all the available evidence.

      Background to the appeal

   3. The appellant's appeal was set down for hearing on 25 October 2018. It
      was not disputed that the appellant only received notification of  his
      appeal hearing on 27 September 2018. He sought  to  obtain  solicitors
      who could obtain public funding. He had been unable to do  this  until
      very recently.

   4. Mr Jafar, who represented the appellant at the hearing on 25  October,
      informed First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Stedman  that  he  had  not  had
      sufficient time to obtain evidence  or  to  prepare  a  statement  and
      instruct an expert. Further, there was country material which had  not
      been provided. The application for an adjournment was opposed.

   5. Judge Stedman refused the adjournment. He stated  that  the  appellant
      had solicitors on file and was represented by experienced counsel.  He
      was able to advance  whatever  evidence  he  wished  at  the  hearing.
      Counsel was able to submit any objective information at  the  hearing,
      which he put back until 2pm. He was satisfied that the appellant would
      not be deprived of a fair hearing.

   6. Counsel was given the opportunity to submit further  country  evidence
      which was not opposed by the respondent.  Judge  Stedman  stated  that
      "ultimately there was no information  that  the  appellant  could  not
      present  at  his  appeal  or  submit  at  a  later  time  and  he  was
      represented" [8].

   7. Mr Jafar noted in the grounds of appeal that the appeal was  set  down
      for hearing on 25 October 2018. The appellant informed his  solicitors
      that he was unable to obtain funding  and  therefore  wished  them  to
      continue to represent him. They in turn informed  the  appellant  that
      they would need to seek an adjournment as there was insufficient  time
      to prepare for the hearing.

   8. Accordingly, on 24 October 2018,  which  was  the  day  prior  to  the
      hearing, the solicitors instructed him to make an application  for  an
      adjournment.

   9.  He  informed  the  Judge  that  he  had  been  unable  to  take  full
      instructions from  the  appellant.  Mr  Jafar  informed  me  that  the
      appellant only speaks Arabic, which he  cannot  speak.  There  was  no
      interpreter available to assist him. He was unable to take  a  witness
      statement from the appellant.  Further, he did not at that stage  know
      precisely what the appellant's case was.

  10. He informed the Judge that he wished to obtain  full  instructions  as
      well as prepare a statement and bundle of evidence, and in  particular
      wished to instruct  an  expert  to  comment  on  procedures  regarding
      military service in Egypt, which was a significant  component  in  the
      appeal. Mr Jafar stated he tried to obtain  instructions  and  prepare
      the case before 2pm, but was unable to obtain proper instructions.

  11. He referred to paragraph [26(vi)] of the decision: Judge Stedman found
      that the appellant's failure to produce any documentation as he  might
      reasonably be expected to obtain, for example documentation about  his
      military service or at  the  very  least  a  letter  from  his  family
      describing the visits by the police, to  be  highly  damaging  in  his
      case. His evidence relating to visits by the authorities to his family
      was vague and lacking in detail. He gave the impression  that  he  was
      making up his evidence.

  12. He went on to find that in the light of the country evidence which was
      produced to him and which he set out, it is highly probable  that  the
      appellant has either completed his military service or paid  a  bribe,
      or used connections to either  get  out  of  completing  his  military
      service or to undertake a lesser role. It was not for him to speculate
      on what exactly had transpired in the appellant's  life,  but  on  the
      background evidence that seemed to be the most feasible assessment. It
      was  difficult  to  understand,  having  considered   the   background
      material, if  he  did  not  complete  his  military  service  how,  he
      otherwise would be able to leave the country - [27]. He thus  made  an
      adverse credibility finding against the appellant.

  13. Mr Jafar submitted that in accordance with the principles set  out  by
      the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe (Adjournment: Fairness)  v  SSHD  [2014]
      UKUT 418, the appellant has been deprived  of  his  right  to  a  fair
      hearing following the refusal of his application for adjournment.  The
      test is simply one of fairness:  was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
      affected parties' right to a fair hearing.

  14. He referred to the Court of Appeal decision in SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD
      [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 which reiterates  the  centrality  of  procedural
      fairness, especially in asylum cases. At the heart of that case was  a
      challenge to the Immigration  Judge's  refusal  to  adjourn  to  admit
      independent expert evidence. As  to  the  correct  legal  test  to  be
      applied, the court held at [14] that where an applicant  seeks  to  be
      allowed to establish by contrary evidence that the  case  against  him
      was wrong, the question will always be, whatever stage the proceedings
      have reached, 'What does fairness demand?'

  15. Mr Jafar submitted that the refusal of the appellant's application for
      an adjournment was not fair as the  Judge  at  [26(i)]  and  [26(ii)],
      based adverse credibility findings on the basis that  the  appellant's
      evidence  was  inconsistent.  Mr  Jafar  submitted  that  this  was  a
      complicated matter involving 'technical reasons' with respect  to  the
      obtaining of permission to study. This required the appellant to  give
      proper instructions to his solicitor, who had yet to prepare a written
      statement.

  16. The appellant however had to give evidence in a  confused  manner  and
      was subject to a hostile cross examination. The Judge also found  that
      his evidence was  vague  and  lacking  in  detail,  which,  Mr  Jafar,
      submitted, was inevitable as the appellant had  not  been  allowed  to
      prepare his evidence in detail before the hearing, as usual, through a
      written statement.

  17. He noted that the Judge made an adverse  credibility  finding  on  the
      basis of the appellant's failure to provide  further  evidence,  which
      was the very reason why he had applied for an adjournment.

  18. In addition, Mr Jafar he  submitted  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Stedman erred in basing adverse credibility findings on assumptions as
      to  how  the  Egyptian  authorities  would  behave   [26(ii-v)].   The
      adjournment was sought for the very purpose of instructing  an  expert
      on those points where country expertise would be significant.

  19. He submitted that given the scale of persecution carried  out  by  the
      Egyptian government against its own population, as referred to in  the
      judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Macharia  v  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal [2000] IMM AR 190 at 196, that  there  may  be  circumstances
      where, in the interests of justice, or for the effective  disposal  of
      the appeal, it would be proper to grant an  adjournment,  particularly
      in a case where it is the asylum seeker putting in  further  evidence.
      Throughout, the Tribunal has to bear in mind that an  asylum  decision
      has potentially grave consequences for the asylum  seeker  whose  very
      life may be put at risk by an adverse decision.

  20. Mr Jafar stated that although the case was put back to 2  pm,  he  had
      not had a proper opportunity to  prepare  the  case  for  the  reasons
      referred to. He was only able to receive limited instructions, as  the
      appellant's English was very limited.

  21. He submitted that in the circumstances, he had  not  been  afforded  a
      reasonable opportunity to prepare his case before he was  called  upon
      to present it. He referred to the decision of Lord Widgery CJ in  R  v
      Thames Magistrates' Court  Ex  Polemis  [1974]  2  All  ER  1219  page
      1223(b): The opportunity to  present  a  case  to  the  Court  is  not
      confined to being given the opportunity to stand up and say  what  you
      want to say; it necessarily extends to  a  reasonable  opportunity  to
      prepare your case before you are called upon to present it.

  22. Mr Jafar submitted that an inevitable outcome of not allowing the case
      to be prepared is that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Stedman  did  not
      understand the case that should have been made. At [28] he found  that
      prosecution for draft evasion does not amount to persecution. However,
      the appellant's case was not that he feared prosecution, but  that  he
      feared he would be required to engage in human rights abuses that were
      so systemic as a tool of government that it would be  termed  a  crime
      against humanity. Accordingly the respondent's policy at  page  24  of
      33, published for the Home Office staff on 1 July 2016, applied.

  23. I was informed by Mr Jafar that there  was  significant  documentation
      that needed to be obtained and which has subsequently  been  obtained,
      which  could  make  a  material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
      appellant's appeal.

  24. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Melvin adopted his Rule  24  response.
      He submitted that the Judge considered the application for adjournment
      at [7-8]. He granted counsel the opportunity of providing the Tribunal
      with any further objective evidence which they sought to rely  on.  He
      had regard to the decision in Nwaigwe, supra, and was  satisfied  that
      when applying the test, the appellant would not be deprived of a  fair
      hearing.

  25. First-tier Tribunal Judge Stedman set out the  respondent's  position,
      as well as  the  appellant's  evidence  and  the  country  information
      produced. His findings were  based  on  the  oral  evidence  from  the
      appellant  as  well  as  submissions  from  counsel  [15-17].  Country
      information was considered from [18-22]. He 'drew conclusions' on  the
      evidence at [29].

  26. The appellant has been in the UK since October 2016, only  making  his
      asylum claim in March 2018 having  been  arrested  as  an  overstayer.
      During his interview he stated that documents in support of the  claim
      would be available from Egypt, but despite regular  contact  with  his
      family, those documents have failed to materialise.

  27. Mr Melvin submitted that it would have been against the  interests  of
      justice for this appeal to have been adjourned  to  enable  legal  aid
      funded expert reports to be obtained. It appears that  no  time  limit
      was given, at  the  adjournment  request,  as  what  expert  had  been
      approached,  nor  any  timescale  in  which  the   report   could   be
      commissioned or what the expert might bring to the appeal.

  28. He submitted that the decision is properly reasoned and  the  findings
      are based on the uncontested  objective  evidence  provided,  combined
      with the Judge's review of the appellant's evidence to the  challenges
      raised in the reasons for refusal.

  29. In reply, Mr Jafar accepted that there might have been  mistakes  made
      by both him and his solicitors. There had been nothing like  the  kind
      of preparation that is required in a case such as  this.  He  did  not
      have a set of instructions and his communication  with  the  appellant
      was very limited. No application had been made prior to  this  for  an
      adjournment. In the circumstances, the Judge  should  have  done  more
      than simply state that the objective material can be provided within a
      few hours.

  30. Mr Jafar again submitted to the Tribunal that the  objective  evidence
      which he wished to make available to the Tribunal, is available.




      Assessment

  31. The appellant's asylum claim was  refused  by  the  respondent  on  11
      September  2018.  Following  the  refusal,  he  appealed  against  the
      decision. In his grounds of appeal it was noted that the decision  was
      sent by post on 13 September 2018.

  32. The chronology presented by Mr Jafar has not been disputed: notice  of
      hearing was given to the appellant and his solicitors on 27  September
      2018. They were informed that the hearing of  the  appellant's  appeal
      would be heard on 25 October 2018.

  33.  Following  receipt  of  the  notice   of   hearing,   the   appellant
      unsuccessfully sought to obtain legally aided solicitors to  represent
      him at the appeal.

  34. He informed his  solicitors  that  he  was  unable  to  obtain  funded
      solicitors and requested  them  to  continue  to  represent  him.  The
      solicitors informed him that they would then seek  an  adjournment  as
      there was insufficient time to prepare for the hearing.

  35. On 24 October 2018 - the  day  before  the  scheduled  hearing  -  the
      solicitors instructed Mr Jafar to apply for  an  adjournment.  He  was
      only instructed the day before the hearing.

  36. Mr Jafar did not receive a witness statement or from  the  solicitors.
      His only instructions were to apply for an adjournment.

  37. In making his application, he informed the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
      time was needed to afford the appellant an opportunity  to  prepare  a
      proper statement and to provide a bundle of evidence. He  also  sought
      the adjournment in order that an expert witness could  be  instructed,
      relating to the 'technicalities' of military service in  Egypt.   This
      was necessary  for  the  effective  presentation  of  the  appellant's
      appeal. He also needed to advise his  solicitors  to  obtain  relevant
      evidence from the country of origin.

  38. Mr Jafar stated that it had not been possible to obtain a  proper,  or
      any, statement from the appellant during the few hours  given  to  him
      after his adjournment application was refused. He  did  not  have  the
      benefit of an interpreter at the time. The appellant was  barely  able
      to speak English to a standard which enabled Mr  Jafar  to  prepare  a
      proper witness statement. Mr Jafar frankly stated that  he  was  still
      not aware of the full nature of the appellant's case.

  39. I have had regard to some of Mr Melvin's telling points, including his
      submission that the appellant has been in the UK  since  October  2016
      and only made his asylum claim some one and a half years later,  after
      being arrested as an  overstayer.  Although  noting  that  there  were
      documents available from Egypt, and that he was in  contact  with  his
      family in Egypt, the documents were not produced.

  40. Mr Jafar noted that adverse credibility findings were made against the
      appellant. He submitted that the procedure in obtaining permission  to
      study in Egypt at the time, as well as the passport that was  arranged
      for the appellant at the time, involved "highly technical procedures."
      Proper instructions had not been  taken  from  the  appellant  by  his
      solicitors. No written statement setting out the detail and nature  of
      his case had been prepared. In the circumstances, Mr Jafar informed me
      that in the event, the appellant was  simply  cross  examined  without
      having made a statement setting out his case. There was no evidence in
      chief.

  41. In  the  circumstances,  the  Judge's  finding  that  the  appellant's
      evidence was vague and lacking in detail is not surprising.

  42. Judge Stedman made adverse credibility findings on the basis that  the
      appellant had not produced further evidence from Egypt.  That  however
      had been one of the reasons why the adjournment was sought, namely, to
      obtain such evidence.  That included evidence relating to the military
      procedures for call  ups  to  the  army.  Mr  Jafar  stated  that  the
      appellant sought to  establish  by  country  evidence  that  the  case
      against him was accordingly wrong.

  43. It is also  evident  that  Judge  Stedman  based  adverse  credibility
      findings on his assumptions as to how the Egyptian  authorities  would
      behave [26]. Again, an adjournment in order to instruct an  expert  to
      deal with those points had been  refused.  The  appellant's  case  was
      however not that he feared prosecution but that he feared he would  be
      required to engage in human rights abuses which  were  systemic  as  a
      tool of government.

  44. In the circumstances, I find  that  the  refusal  of  his  adjournment
      deprived the appellant of his right to a fair hearing. As noted by the
      President (as he then was) in Nwaigwe, supra,  the  question  for  the
      Upper  Tribunal  is  not  whether  the   First-tier   Tribunal   acted
      reasonably, but simply one of fairness.

  45. The centrality of procedural fairness, especially in asylum cases,  is
      also emphasised in SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ  1284.  The
      Court of Appeal noted that where the appellant seeks to be allowed  to
      establish by contrary evidence that the case against him is wrong, the
      question will always be,  whatever  the  stage  the  proceedings  have
      reached, what does fairness demand?

  46. In the circumstances I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law.

  47. The parties agreed that in the event of such a  decision,  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge's determination should be set aside.  They  agreed
      that this was an appropriate case to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made on all issues.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and the decision is set aside.


      The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross)  for  a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 4 February 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

