
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11367/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Birmingham                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25th May 2021                    |On 15th June 2021                   |
|                                    |                                    |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA




                                   Between


                                     N A
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr N Khan, NK Solicitors acting as agents for
                        IIAS Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS




An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),  and  as
this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless
and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, NA  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or
any member of her family.  This direction  applies  amongst  others  to  all
parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


Introduction


      1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. She claims to have arrived
         in the United Kingdom on 18 June 2009 on a family visit visa.   She
         claimed  asylum  in  May  2013.  That  claim  was  refused  by  the
         respondent in March 2016 and the appellant's  appeal  against  that
         decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thomas  for
         reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 27th January 2017. The
         appellant then made further submissions to the respondent  in  July
         2017 and December 2018. On each occasion the respondent refused  to
         treat the further submissions as a fresh claim. On 2nd August  2019
         the appellant again made further  submissions  in  support  of  her
         claim for international protection. Her son, who I refer to as [SA]
         (born 19th July 1995), is a dependant.  The appellant's  claim  was
         refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a  decision  dated
         7th November 2019.


      2. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision  of  7th  November
         2019. Her was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hobson  for
         reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 10th February 2020.


      3. The appellant  relies  upon  undated  'Grounds  for  Permission  to
         Appeal' settled by counsel, Mr F Chaudhry.   The  appellant  claims
         the  findings  made  by  Judge  Hobson  regarding  the  claim   for
         international protection are flawed.  First, it is said that  Judge
         Hobson accepted the appellant is vulnerable having been a victim of
         domestic  violence  and  someone  who  has  a  number   of   health
         conditions.   The  appellant  claims   Judge   Hobson   found   the
         appellant's evidence to be extremely vague  and  in  assessing  the
         evidence, "applied a very high standard  of  proof".   Second,  the
         appellant claims the case law favours the appellant.  Reference  is
         made, without further elaboration,  to  the  decisions  in  Chivers
         [1997] INLR 212 and HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1307.  Third,  it  is
         said Judge Hobson made findings on the basis of speculation.    The
         appellant also claims Judge  Hobson  materially  erred  in  law  in
         assessment of the  appellant's  Article  8  claim.   The  appellant
         claims the conclusion that the appellant has  failed  to  establish
         that there would be very significant obstacles to  her  integration
         into  Pakistan  is  not  sustainable  because  the   appellant   is
         registered blind, has  other  health  conditions,  and  she  has  a
         dependent  son  with  learning   disabilities.   Furthermore,   the
         appellant claims that in reaching her conclusion that there are  no
         exceptional circumstances which would lead to  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences for the appellant in breach of Article 8, Judge Hobson
         erred in failing to attach any weight to the appellant's  blindness
         and the length of her stay in the UK.


      4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on
         17th July 2020.  She said:


                  "It  is  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   when
             considering whether there are very  significant  obstacles  to
             reintegration failed to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
             blindness or any impact of that on reintegration on return  to
             a country from  which  she  has  been  absent  for  11  years.
             Although there was a lack of evidence as  to  the  Appellant's
             son's learning disabilities and the impact  of  those  on  his
             life, it is arguable that these were not  taken  into  account
             when considering if there were any very significant  obstacles
             to reintegration. It is further arguable that  neither  matter
             was considered as part  of  the  balancing  exercise  for  the
             purposes of Article 8.


                  There is far  less  merit  in  the  remaining  grounds  of
             challenge given the  detailed  assessment  of  the  protection
             claim by the First-tier Tribunal which did not  arguably  fail
             to have regard to the Appellant's vulnerability  and  accepted
             much of the basis of claim to be credible, just not  that  she
             would be at risk on return. However, I do  not  exclude  these
             grounds from the grant of permission."


The appeal before me


      5. I heard submissions from Mr Khan on behalf of the  appellant.   The
         respondent had filed and served  a  rule  24  response  dated  17th
         August 2020.  At the conclusion of the hearing before me I informed
         the parties that in my judgement there is no material error of  law
         in the decision of Judge Hobson and the  appeal  is  dismissed.   I
         informed the parties that I would provide full written  reasons  in
         writing, and this I now do.


      6. Mr Khan adopted the undated skeleton argument that is to  be  found
         at pages 1 to 4 of the appellant's bundle sent to the  Tribunal  by
         IIAS Solicitors under cover of a letter dated 17th May 2021.


      7. Although dealt with last in the appellant's skeleton  argument,  it
         is  appropriate  to  consider  the  appellant's  challenge  to  the
         decision to dismiss the appeal on international protection  grounds
         first.


      8.  The  appellant  claims  Judge  Hobson  erred  in  dismissing   the
         international protection appeal on the grounds of credibility.  The
         appellant submits it is not in dispute that  she  is  a  victim  of
         domestic  violence,  registered  as  blind,  and  is  a  vulnerable
         witness.  Judge Hobson accepted the evidence that  the  appellant's
         parents are now deceased, and the appellant  submits  that  as  her
         evidence was 'more or less' deemed credible, the appeal should have
         been allowed.  Mr Khan did not expand upon those submissions at all
         before me.


      9. It was in my judgement open to judge Hobson to  conclude  that  the
         claim for international protection cannot succeed for  the  reasons
         set out at paragraphs [43] to [54] of her decision.   Judge  Hobson
         referred to the previous  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Thomas and in light of the previous  findings  made,  accepted  the
         appellant was physically abused by her ex-husband when she lived in
         Pakistan and sought refuge in a women's shelter.   She  noted  they
         divorced in 2009.  As Judge Hobson properly noted,  the  principles
         set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702,  applied  to  the  appeal
         before her, and the decision of Judge Thomas stood as an assessment
         of the claim that the appellant was making at the time of the first
         decision.  Judge Hobson properly went on to consider, at  paragraph
         [45] of her decision, the appellant's claim that her ex-husband had
         made  threats  towards  her  through  third  parties  whom  he  had
         contacted. She considered the evidence to be vague and incredible.


     10. Judge Hobson also considered the appellant's claim that  she  would
         be at risk of destitution as a lone female with no family  support,
         such that return to Pakistan would be contrary to Article 2  and  3
         ECHR.  Judge Hobson accepted the appellant's parents have died  but
         rejected the evidence  that  the  appellant  has  no  close  family
         members left in Pakistan and  would  be  without  any  support.  At
         paragraph [49] of her decision, Judge Hobson addresses the evidence
         of the appellant's brother Asjad Hussain.  He claims in his  letter
         dated 23rd July 2019 that their mother,  father  and  brother  have
         passed away and the appellant now has no close  relatives  who  can
         support and help her.  The appellant's evidence was that her sister-
         in-law (i.e. the wife of the appellant's  brother  who  has  passed
         away), her nieces and nephews continue  to  live  in  Pakistan  and
         they, and the appellant,  are  supported  by  her  bother.    Judge
         Hobson noted, at paragraph [50], that the appellant's parents house
         is uninhabited and there was no evidence before the  Tribunal  that
         that house is owned by her brother's widow  (i.e.  the  appellant's
         sister-in-law who remains in Pakistan).  Judge Hobson found that in
         all the circumstances, the appellant  would  not  be  returning  to
         Pakistan as a lone woman without family support.


     11. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Khan  accepted  Judge  Hobson  was
         entitled to find on the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  the
         appellant's sister-in-law, nieces and nephews live in Pakistan  and
         that they  are  financially  supported  by  her  brother.  He  also
         accepted Judge Hobson was right to say that the appellant's brother
         provides her with financial support.  Mr Khan accepted Judge Hobson
         properly noted the appellant's evidence that her parents  house  is
         uninhabited.  He accepts there was no evidence before the  Tribunal
         regarding the ownership of the house and the evidence as to whether
         her sister-in-law wanted to sell the house was vague.   He  accepts
         it was open to Judge Hobson to find  that  the  evidence  was  very
         vague and for that reason, to lack credibility.


     12. The findings and conclusions reached by Judge Hobson regarding  the
         claim for international protection and on Article 2 and  3  grounds
         were neither irrational nor unreasonable in the  Wednesbury  sense,
         or findings and conclusions that were  wholly  unsupported  by  the
         evidence.  The weight to  be  placed  upon  factors  of  identified
         vulnerability, and the extent to which  the  vulnerability  was  an
         element of any inconsistency or lack of clarity, was a  matter  for
         the Judge to be considered on the evidence before the Tribunal.  Mr
         Khan did not draw my attention to  any  evidence  that  was  before
         Judge Hobson that was capable of establishing that the  appellant's
         visual impairment or health is  such  that  it  impacted  upon  her
         ability to give clear and cogent evidence before the Tribunal.


     13. At paragraph [17] of her decision, Judge Hobson  confirms  that  in
         considering the claim for international protection she applied  the
         lower standard.  Mr Khan did not draw my attention to  anything  in
         the decision that even begins to indicate that Judge Hobson applied
         anything other than the lower standard.  The judge's decision  took
         account of all the evidence, and she accorded appropriate weight to
         the evidence that was  available  and  was  entitled  to  draw  the
         adverse conclusions that she did from the evidence. The appellant's
         claim that the judge's approach to the analysis of the evidence  is
         mere disagreement with  the  reasoning  of  Judge  Hobson.    Judge
         Hobson's decision to dismiss the appeal on international protection
         and Article 2 and 3 grounds is cogently reasoned and  was  properly
         open to her on the evidence before the Tribunal.


     14. I turn then to the appellant's claim that Judge Hobson erred in her
         assessment of the appeal on Article 8 grounds.    Mr  Khan  submits
         the focus of the appeal before me is upon the Judge's assessment of
         the Article 8 claim and in particular, whether  the  appellant  has
         established  that  there  are   very   significant   obstacles   to
         integration in Pakistan.


     15. I take the six points referred to in paragraph 1 of the appellant's
         skeleton argument together, since  they  all  concern  the  Judge's
         assessment of the private life claim made by the appellant.


     16. In Parveen v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  932,  the  Court  of  Appeal
         considered the relevant provision,  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  which
         applies where an applicant has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for
         less than 20 years and "there would be very  significant  obstacles
         to their integration in the country of return".   As  Underhill  LJ
         noted in Parveen v SSHD,  that  test  will  not  be  met  by  "mere
         inconvenience or upheaval".  In the end, the task of the  Secretary
         of State, or the Tribunal, in any given case is  simply  to  assess
         the obstacles to integration relied on,  whether  characterised  as
         hardship or difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether they
         regard them as "very significant".


     17. I reject the appellant's claim that Judge Hobson's finding that the
         appellant will receive support from her nephews and nieces is based
         upon speculation.  Judge Hobson found, at paragraph [51], that  the
         appellant would not be  returning  to  Pakistan  as  a  lone  woman
         without family support.  She found that there is  a  financial  and
         emotional support available to the appellant  in  Pakistan.   As  I
         have said at paragraph [11] above, at the  hearing  before  me,  Mr
         Khan accepted Judge Hobson was entitled to  find  on  the  evidence
         before the Tribunal that the appellant's sister-in-law, nieces  and
         nephews live in Pakistan and that they are financially supported by
         her brother. He also accepted Judge Hobson was right  to  say  that
         the appellant's brother provides her with financial  support.   The
         findings were rooted in the evidence and are  neither  unreasonable
         nor perverse.


     18. At paragraph [57] Judge Hobson accepted the appellant and  her  son
         have been in  the  United  Kingdom  for  over  10  years  and  have
         developed relationships with friends during that time. She accepted
         the respondent's decision to refuse the application  for  leave  to
         remain amounts to an interference with their  right  to  a  private
         life.   At  paragraph  [61],  she  concluded   that   neither   the
         appellant's nor her son's health is  such  that  it  could  not  be
         treated appropriately in Pakistan. Family and financial support  is
         potentially available to them and Judge Hobson  was  not  satisfied
         that there would be very significant obstacles to  either  of  them
         integrating into Pakistani life.


     19. I reject the claim that Judge Hobson failed to  take  into  account
         the appellant's impaired vision  or  any  impact  of  that  on  her
         reintegration in a country from which she has been  absent  for  11
         years, and that in reaching her decision, Judge  Hobson  failed  to
         have regard to [SA's] learning disability. At paragraph [52]  Judge
         Hobson referred to the appellant's health and found  there  was  no
         credible  evidence  before  her  to  support  a  finding  that  the
         necessary treatment she requires is not available in Pakistan.


     20. During the course of the hearing before me, I referred Mr  Khan  to
         the letter from Dr Mehreen Ali of the Albion  House  Surgery  dated
         14th January 2020 that was relied upon  by  the  appellant  at  the
         hearing of her appeal before the  FtT.   The  letter  confirms  the
         appellant is registered blind, due to the chronic and  degenerative
         ophthalmological condition of retinitis pigmentosa,  that  requires
         ophthalmological monitoring by a  consultant  eye  specialist.  The
         letter confirms the appellant suffers from mental  health  problems
         in the form of generalised anxiety and a depressive  disorder  that
         is  treated  with  antidepressant  and  antipsychotic   medication.
         Having had an opportunity of reading that letter, Mr Khan  accepted
         that Judge Hobson accurately summarised the evidence  at  paragraph
         [52] of her decision and it was open to her to note that Dr Ali had
         failed to explain her conclusion that the appellant  would  not  be
         able to pay or have access to reliable healthcare in Pakistan.   He
         accepted it was in all the circumstances open to  Judge  Hobson  to
         conclude, as she did at [53], that she could not be satisfied  that
         the  appellant  will  be  unable  to  obtain  appropriate   medical
         treatment.


     21. The appellant submits she has been in the UK for several years  and
         her health has not improved.  She questions how it might improve in
         a third world country.  With respect to the author of the  skeleton
         argument, the claim is misconceived.  In GS (India) v  SSHD  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 40, Underhill LJ said at [111]:


             "First the absence or inadequacy of  medical  treatment,  even
             life preserving treatment, in the country of return, cannot be
             relied on at all as a fact engaging article 8: if that is  all
             there is, the claim must fail. Secondly, where  article  8  is
             engaged by other  factors,  the  fact  that  the  claimant  is
             receiving medical treatment in this country which may  or  may
             not be available in the country of return may be a  factor  in
             the  proportionality  exercise;  but  that  factor  cannot  be
             treated as by itself giving rise to a breach since that  would
             contravene the no obligation to treat principle."


     22. In SL (Saint Lucia) v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1894,  the  Court  of
         Appeal considered whether Paposhvili had any impact on the approach
         to  Article  8  claims  but  rejected  that  submission.  At  [27],
         Hickinbottom LJ said:


             "As I have indicated and as GS  India  emphasises,  article  8
             claims have a different focus  and  are  based  upon  entirely
             different criteria. In particular, article 8 is not article  3
             with merely a lower threshold: it does not provide  some  sort
             of safety net where  a  medical  case  fails  to  satisfy  the
             article 3 criteria. An absence of  medical  treatment  in  the
             country of return will not in itself  engage  article  8.  The
             only relevance to article 8 of such an absence will  be  where
             that is an additional factor in the balance with other factors
             which themselves engage article 8?.


     23. All that the appellant relies upon here in support of her Article 8
         claim is her wish to continue with medical  treatment  in  the  UK.
         That in itself is insufficient to establish an Article 8 claim.


     24. At paragraph [54] of her decision, Judge  Hobson  referred  to  the
         appellant's son, [SA], and noted he is an adult  who  has  learning
         difficulties. She noted there was no evidence before  the  Tribunal
         of the extent of his impairment, nor of any particular difficulties
         he is likely to have, if  he  returns  to  Pakistan.  The  evidence
         before the Tribunal was that he has lived alone in  the  UK  for  a
         time and does not have any requirement for care and support,  aside
         from that provided by  the  appellant.   At  paragraph  [57]  Judge
         Hobson accepted that the appellant and her son  have  been  in  the
         United Kingdom for 10 years and that the  appellant  has  developed
         relationships with friends during that time.


     25. In Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813, [2016] 4 WLR  152,  Sales  LJ
         held that the idea of 'integration' calls for  a  broad  evaluative
         judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be enough  of
         an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
         that other country is carried on and a capacity to  participate  in
         it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to
         be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to
         build up within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships
         to give substance to the individual's private or family life.  When
         pressed, Mr Khan was unable  to  identify  any  evidence  that  was
         before the First-tier Tribunal that Judge Hobson had failed to take
         into account or have regard to.  He was equally unable to  identify
         any findings made by Judge Hobson that could be  considered  to  be
         unreasonable or perverse.


     26. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant was  that  the
         respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights  Act
         1998. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017]
         UKSC 11 confirms that the ultimate issue is whether a fair balance
         has been struck between the individual and public interest,  giving
         due weight to the provisions of the rules.  That  was  plainly  the
         approach adopted by Judge Hobson at paragraphs [49] to [67] of  her
         decision.


     27. In my judgement, read as a whole, Judge Hobson reached  conclusions
         that were properly open to her on the evidence before the Tribunal.
          The Judge referred to  the  obstacles  to  integration  that  were
         relied upon by the appellant.  Quite simply, there  is  nothing  in
         the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  establishes  that   the
         stringent test set out in paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  could  be  met.
         The findings made by the judge were  findings  that  were  properly
         open to the judge  on  the  evidence  and  cannot  be  said  to  be
         perverse, irrational or findings that were  not  supported  by  the
         evidence.  The assessment of such a claim is always a  highly  fact
         sensitive task.   The  FtT  judge  was  required  to  consider  the
         evidence as a whole.


     28. In reaching her decision,  Judge  Hobson  carried  out  an  overall
         proportionality assessment and whether  a  fair  balance  has  been
         struck between the  individual  and  public  interest,  noting  the
         express statutory provision set out in s117B of the 2002 Act.   She
         referred to factors that weigh in favour of the appellant.  It  was
         in my judgement open to judge Hobson to conclude that  the  removal
         of the appellant is in all the circumstances proportionate.


     29. It is now well established that it is necessary  to  guard  against
         the temptation to characterise as errors of law what are  in  truth
         no more  than  disagreements  about  the  weight  to  be  given  to
         different factors, particularly if the judge who decided the appeal
         had the advantage of hearing oral evidence. The assessment of  such
         a claim is always a highly fact sensitive task.  The FtT judge  was
         required to consider the evidence as a whole and  she  plainly  did
         so, giving adequate reasons for her decision.


     30. It follows that I dismiss this appeal.


Notice of Decision


     31. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Hobson stands.


       V. Mandalia                       Date     28th May 2021


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







