
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/11485/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 August 2017                     |        On 29 August 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                            Mr george muchapirei
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Winter, instructed by Katani & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 5 October 2016 to refuse  to  revoke  a  deportation
    order and to refuse his asylum claim.

 2. The applicant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 1999.  He is in a relationship  with  a  partner  who  is
    settled here and they have  two  children  both  of  whom  are  British
    citizens.   The  older,  aged  13,  has  Down's  Syndrome,  significant
    learning disabilities and a hole in the heart;  the  younger  child  is
    aged 6.  The appellant's partner's mother who is also a British citizen
    is recognised as a refugee and has a  number  of  health  problems  and
    lives as part of a family.

 3. The respondent refused the asylum claim considering that Section 72  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 applies; that he was not at risk if returned to
    Zimbabwe; and, that he did not meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules specifically 398 and 399A, having applied paragraphs 362 and 390.

 4.  It  is  agreed  between  the  parties  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    misdirected itself in its determination at [35] but the  relevant  test
    in this case was whether there were very compelling circumstances,  the
    panel apparently believing that this was the relevant test  in  respect
    of paragraph 398B despite the fact that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of greater than four years.  It  is
    also accepted this may not necessarily have been a material  error  had
    the Tribunal otherwise dealt with the issue set out in paragraph 399A.

 5. Whilst the panel does appear to  have  addressed  the  issue  of  undue
    harshness the decision is not  sustainable  because  the  panel  failed
    adequately to set out:-

      i) what the effect of moving to Zimbabwe would have  on  the  children
         with specific reference to the health needs and other support needs
         of the older child;

     ii) failed to indicate what weight and  been  attached  to  the  public
         interest in assessing undue harshness in this aspect;

    iii) failed properly to assess the impact there would be on the children
         if the father were to be deported, again not least given the health
         and other needs of the elder child;

     iv) to make findings as to what public interest had  been  attached  in
         assessing undue harshness.

 6. Further, whilst this appeal was specifically  under  Article  8,  these
    considerations  apply  also  in  assessing  whether  removal  would  be
    proportionate.  These considerations should have formed a part  of  the
    consideration, when considering amongst other  matters  the  effect  of
    Section 117C of the 2002 Act.

 7. As Mr Matthews accepted, no proper  findings  of  fact  were  made  and
    accordingly the decision falls to be set aside.

 8. I am satisfied for these reasons that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law and must  be  aside.
    In considering whether to  remit  the  matter,  both  parties  were  in
    agreement that although the decision was relatively recent,  a  further
    extensive fact-finding exercise was required given that there had  been
    no proper findings as to the impact  of  removal  to  Zimbabwe  of  the
    children or of the effect of deportation of their father on  them  were
    they to remain here.  It was not, in particular, clear  why  the  panel
    considered that social services or other  support  could  or  would  be
    available to the family nor is it clear why this would be  an  adequate
    substitute for the presence of the father.

 9. Accordingly, I remit the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision.

10. As Mr Winter acceded, the asylum issue is no longer live  and  was  not
    pursued on appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  He conceded that  the  matter
    would not be  pursued  even  though  the  matter  was  being  remitted.
    Accordingly, I  direct  that  fresh  consideration  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall be limited to considering whether removal  would  be  in
    breach of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  and  on  the  basis
    that it is conceded that the applicant does  not  have  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Zimbabwe or that his return there  would  be  in
    breach of Article 3.

Summary of Conclusions

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

2.    I  remit  the  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a   fresh
    consideration of the Article 8 issues it being conceded that the asylum
    claim is no longer in issue.

3.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 25 August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

