

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11081/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 June 2019                      |On 27 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     A N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr T Mahmood, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 4 November  1987.  She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent on 23  August  2018  to
    refuse her protection claim.  Her appeal was dismissed by Judge of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Boylan-Kemp  MBE  ("the  FTTJ")  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 10 April 2019.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro
    in the following terms:

         "...

         2.  The grounds assert that the judge did not assess  the  evidence
         properly, in particular that the judge failed to apply the guidance
         given in HJ Iran and failed to give adequate consideration  to  the
         country evidence.

         3.   It is arguable that the judge fell into error in finding  that
         the appellant who has been accepted to be a lesbian can relocate to
         the [sic] Bangladesh without giving adequate consideration  to  the
         respondent's country policy note which states that  society  exerts
         immense pressure on lesbian [sic] to get married and on  resisting,
         some experienced violence from their family members. Permission  is
         granted."

The Hearing

 3. The grounds of appeal to this tribunal are two: a failure to apply  the
    principles in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2010] UKSC 31 and a  failure  to  consider  the  respondent's  Country
    Policy and Information Notes on Bangladesh.

 4. Dr Mahmood, for the appellant, submitted the absence of reference to HJ
    (Iran) in the FTTJ's decision, demonstrated she  had  not  applied  her
    mind to the four stage assessment required pursuant to  that  judgment.
    It had been accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the  appellant  was  a
    lesbian; the issue to be decided was the impact  of  her  sexuality  on
    return.  The FTTJ had not,  he  submitted,  considered  adequately  the
    respondent's Country Policy and Information  Note,  Bangladesh:  Sexual
    orientation and gender identity, Version 3.0, published November  2017,
    particularly paragraph 4.2.1. It was accepted  by  the  appellant  that
    there was no specific law prohibiting lesbian activities but  it  could
    be inferred from the background  material  relating  to  gay  men  that
    Section 377 of  the  Bangladesh  Penal  Code  was  also  applicable  to
    lesbians.

 5. Dr Mahmood submitted that the conclusion at [16] of the FTTJ's decision
    that Section 377 of the Bangladeshi  Penal  Code  could  not  apply  to
    females was wrong and arose from an improper analysis.   He  relied  on
    the conclusion of Professor Yasmin, in her expert report which had been
    before the FTTJ, that members of the LGBT community "often fall victims
    of persecution".  He submitted  that,  had  the  FTTJ  taken  Professor
    Yasmin's opinion in her second paragraph into account, she  would  have
    come to a different conclusion as regards the risk on return.

 6. In response, Mr Tarlow, for the  respondent,  submitted  there  was  no
    material error of law. He noted the  FTTJ  found  at  [18]  a  lack  of
    criminalisation and that there was no risk to the appellant from  state
    actors.  He noted the  FTTJ  observed  at  [19]  that  the  appellant's
    previous problems had stopped when she had changed her contact details.
     He took the appellant's  point  about  paragraph  4.2.1  of  the  CPIN
    regarding unnatural offences but also referred to paragraphs 4.6.3  and
    5.1.1.  He noted  the  lack  of  enforcement  of  Section  377  by  the
    authorities. In summary he submitted that the findings of the FTTJ were
    open to her.  The  respondent  had  accepted  the  appellant  would  be
    subjected to discrimination (paragraph 61 of the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter referred) but this was not sufficient to amount to  persecution.
    In effect, the FTTJ did not reach the second stage  of  the  HJ  (Iran)
    test.  There had been no need for  the  FTTJ  to  consider  the  matter
    further having found that lesbians were not at risk.

 7. In reply, Dr Mahmood reiterated his earlier submissions.  He  submitted
    that 90% of the population in Bangladesh were Muslim  and  that  Sharia
    law applied.  He submitted that the expert report, irrespective of  the
    legal position, demonstrated that the HJ (Iran) threshold was  crossed.
    The FTTJ should have considered whether there would be state protection
    for the appellant.

Discussion

 8. The respondent accepted the appellant was a lesbian.   The  appellant's
    evidence, before the FTTJ, was that she had had a lesbian  relationship
    in Bangladesh but that she had ended that  relationship  when  she  had
    received rape and death threats in 2010 from people who had  found  out
    about it.  The appellant did not seek the protection of the police.  At
    that time the appellant denied her sexuality to her family  but,  while
    she was in the UK, they discovered it.  Her family  told  her  she  had
    brought shame on them.  The appellant has not been in  touch  with  her
    family since about 2016.  The sole issue to be decided by the FTTJ  was
    risk on return.

 9. Lord Hope identified in HJ (Iran) at [35] the test  to  be  adopted  by
    fact-finding tribunals. He said it was necessary to proceed in stages:

         "(a)     The first stage, of course, is to consider whether the
         applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of that
         orientation he will not be entitled to be treated as a member of
         the particular social group. But I would regard this part of the
         test as having been satisfied if the applicant's case is that he is
         at risk of persecution because he is suspected of being gay, if his
         past history shows that this is in fact the case.


         (b)      The next stage is to examine a group of questions which
         are directed to what his situation will be on return. This part of
         the inquiry is directed to what will happen in the future. The Home
         Office's Country of Origin report will provide the background.
         There will be little difficulty in holding that in countries such
         as Iran and Cameroon gays or persons who are believed to be gay are
         persecuted and that persecution is something that may reasonably be
         feared. The question is how each applicant, looked at individually,
         will conduct himself if returned and how others will react to what
         he does. Those others will include everyone with whom he will come
         in contact, in private as well as in public. The way he conducts
         himself may vary from one situation to another, with varying
         degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to conceal
         aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
         even from those whom he knows may disapprove of it. If he fears
         persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he will be
         entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal to resort to
         concealment may be. The question what is reasonably tolerable has
         no part in this inquiry.


         (c)      On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be
         able to do in the country of his nationality everything that he can
         do openly in the country whose protection he seeks is not the test.
         As I said earlier (see para 15), the Convention was not directed to
         reforming the level of rights in the country of origin. So it would
         be wrong to approach the issue on the basis that the purpose of the
         Convention is to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that he can
         live as freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to
         do if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to everyone the
         human rights standards that are applied by the receiving country
         within its own territory. The focus throughout must be on what will
         happen in the country of origin.


         (d)      The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in
         fact conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is to
         consider why he will do so. If this will simply be in response to
         social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons of his own
         choosing and not because of a fear of persecution, his claim for
         asylum must be rejected. But if the reason why he will resort to
         concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise he will be
         persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that fear is
         well founded.


         (e)      This is the final and conclusive question: does he have a
         well-founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he has, the
         causative condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426, para 5
         will have been established. The applicant will be entitled to
         asylum."


10. The FTTJ makes no reference to HJ (Iran) specifically.  However, I bear
    in mind the guidance of the Court of Appeal. In EA v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 10 Burnett LJ made the following observations at [27]:

         "Decisions of tribunals should  not  become  formulaic  and  rarely
         benefit from copious citation of authority. Arguments  that  reduce
         to the proposition that the F-tT has failed to mention dicta from a
         series of cases in the Court of Appeal  or  elsewhere  will  rarely
         prosper. Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v  Piglowski
         [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read on the  assumption
         that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the judge  knew  how
         he should perform his functions and which matters  he  should  take
         into account". He added that an "appellate court should resist  the
         temptation to subvert the principle that they should not substitute
         their own discretion for that of the  judge  by  a  narrow  textual
         analysis which enables them to claim that he misdirected  himself".
         Moreover, some  principles  are  so  firmly  embedded  in  judicial
         thinking that they do not need to be recited. For example, it would
         be surprising to see in every civil judgment  a  paragraph  dealing
         with the burden and standard of proof; or  in  every  running  down
         action a treatise, however short, on the law  of  negligence.  That
         said, the reader of any judicial decision must  be  reassured  from
         its content that the court or  tribunal  has  applied  the  correct
         legal test to any question it is deciding."


11. In the present case the respondent had  referred  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, at [55] onwards under the heading "Assessment of Future
    Fear", to the guidance in HJ (Iran). The application of  this  guidance
    was not disputed by the appellant who referred to it in her grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal [7].  The appellant noted that it was
    conceded by the respondent,  in  the  reasons  for  refusal,  that  the
    appellant met stage (a) of the test but that the respondent, relying on
    his CPIN  on  sexual  orientation  in  Bangladesh,  had  concluded  the
    appellant did not meet stage (b).

12. Thus the first area of dispute between  the  parties  was  whether  the
    appellant met the threshold at stage (b) of HJ (Iran).  Since this  was
    plain from the reasons for refusal and the grounds of  appeal,  it  can
    reasonably be inferred that the FTTJ had this in  mind  when  assessing
    the risk on return.  Indeed, the  FTTJ  identifies  at  [14]  that  the
    "decision in this appeal comes down primarily to the  risk  arising  to
    the appellant as a result of  her  sexual  orientation.   It  has  been
    accepted by the respondent that she is a lesbian and so this matter  is
    not in dispute".  While the FTTJ could have referred here to  following
    the guidance in HJ (Iran) it is axiomatic that she did so  because  she
    then analyses the objective material to which she was referred  by  the
    appellant's representative, namely the respondent's  CPIN,  Bangladesh:
    Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity,  November  2017.   She  rightly
    notes the content of paragraph 4.2.1 which refers  to  sexual  activity
    between men, being under the heading "Gay and Bisexual Men".  The  FTTJ
    does not accept the submission for the appellant  that  this  provision
    could be applied to a lesbian relationship.  Given  the  terms  of  the
    following paragraph in the CPIN (albeit not cited specifically  by  the
    FTTJ), this is a sustainable finding:

         "Lesbians and bisexual women

         4.3.1.  In 2017 ILGA indicated that female-female  sexual  activity
         was not a criminal offence under  existing  penal  law.  The  Human
         Dignity Trust, in a May 2016 report, did not include Bangladesh  on
         a  list  of  countries  where  'lesbians  and  bisexual  women  are
         criminalised'.

13. The FTTJ acknowledges at [15] the  appellant's  position,  before  her,
    namely that "the appellant could be prosecuted under the laws referring
    to male-male sexual relationships and that the discrimination a lesbian
    would face in Bangladesh was sufficient to amount to persecution."  The
    FTTJ did not accept that submission [16]; her finding is sustainable in
    the light of paragraph 4.2.1 of the CPIN  which  is  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Sexual  activity  between  men,  whether  consensual  or  not,  is
         illegal. Section 377  of  the  Bangladesh  Penal  Code,  originally
         enacted by the colonial government in India in the 1860s, provides:



         'Section 377: Unnatural  offences:  Whoever  voluntary  has  carnal
         intercourse against the order of nature with man, woman, or animal,
         shall be punished with imprisonment for life,  or  imprisonment  of
         either description for a term which may extend  to  10  years,  and
         shall also be liable to fine.

         'Explanation: penetration is sufficient to  constitute  the  carnal
         intercourse necessary to the offence described in this section."

14. The FTTJ also rejected the submission for the appellant that Article 86
    was applicable to lesbians. Paragraph 4.6.1 of that  CPIN  (albeit  not
    cited in full by the FTTJ) is instructive:

         "The report of an April 2015 fact finding  mission  by  the  French
         Office for Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons ('the  2015
         OFPRA FFM Report') noted: 'Article 86 of  the  [Dhaka  Metropolitan
         Police  Ordinance],  entitled  "Penalty  for  being   found   under
         suspicious circumstances between sunset and sunrise", can  be  used
         against LGBT  individuals,  in  particular  its  subparagraph  (b):
         "Having  without  any  satisfactory  excuse  his  face  covered  or
         otherwise disguised", as men wearing makeup and women's clothes  or
         meeting  in  small  groups  during  the  hours  stipulated  in  the
         ordinance may be arrested on the basis of the Article.

         4.6.2  Article 54 of the Code of Penal  Procedure  of  1898,  which
         allows the police to arrest a person (against whom a complaint  has
         been made) without a warrant,  has  also  been  used  against  LGBT
         individuals, according to the OFPRA Report 2015.

         4.6.3. The Global Human Rights Development (GHRD) reported in 2015:
         'Section 377 of the Penal Code is used in conjunction with sections
         54 and 55 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP), which allow  law
         enforcement agencies to arrest without a  warrant,  to  harass  the
         LGBT community. Sections 54 and 55 of CCP are  enforced  as  a  so-
         called "preventative measure": any police  officer  in  charge  can
         arrest individuals whom he/she has a probable cause  or  reasonable
         suspicion that the individual will commit a  "cognisable  offence".
         'The High Court Division of the Supreme  Court  of  Bangladesh  has
         issued detailed guidelines on the enforcement of section 54 of CCP.
         These guidelines were issued to limit the abuse of section  54...by
         law enforcement agencies."

15. The FTTJ found "the article [86] makes no specific reference  to  women
    and there is no logical rationale provided by Dr Ilahi [the appellant's
    representative] as to why this provision could or might be  applied  to
    females".  Before me, no submission has been made to suggest  that  the
    FTTJ misunderstood or failed to take into account the submissions of Dr
    Ilahi (who did not represent the  appellant  before  me).   The  FTTJ's
    finding is sustainable in the light of the background material to which
    she was referred. She has given adequate reasoning  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's submission as regards the application  of  Article  86  and
    Section 377.

16. It is submitted in the grounds of appeal to this tribunal that the FTTJ
    had failed to consider "the relevant provisions of other  CPINS,  which
    deals [sic] with circumstances where sexuality based on  being  Lesbian
    is not a criminal offence, but based on objective evidence, whether the
    Appellant nevertheless would face persecution or would  be  subject  to
    persecution, if she openly discloses her sexuality and  what  would  be
    the consequences and repercussions of such  disclosure".   The  grounds
    refer to the respondent's "Report of a Home Office Fact-Finding Mission
    Bangladesh Conducted 14-16 May 2017 published September 2017,  sections
    7.2, 7.3, 7.9 and 7.10.

17. This Fact-Finding Mission report refers to LGB people being  unable  to
    be open about their sexuality and there being differences in  treatment
    between men and women. It refers to particular  pressure  on  women  to
    marry by about 30 and lesbians being forced  into  marriage.   However,
    this appellant has no contact with her family and has not  had  contact
    since 2016. Thus the potential threat of  being  forced  into  marriage
    does not arise here.  The report  refers  at  paragraph  7.3.2  to  the
    arrest of men which, again, is of no relevance  here.  Paragraph  7.9.1
    refers to societal treatment and, particularly discrimination, an issue
    which is not in dispute but which does not assist  the  appellant.   At
    paragraph 7.10.1 it is stated that "several sources suggested that LGBT
    people  would  not  feel  that  they  could  approach  the  police  for
    protection ... However, members of the press noted that the police  are
    obliged to take on  a  case,  irrespective  of  the  sexuality  of  the
    reporter of the crime; and BLAST  noted  that  there  is  'very  little
    research on these issues'". Again this does not assist  the  appellant.
    While it is her evidence that she had not sought police  protection  in
    the past and that she believed such protection would not  be  available
    to her, this report demonstrates that police protection is available to
    lesbians who seek it.

18. The grounds of appeal to this tribunal also  refer  to  the  impact  of
    Sharia Law as identified in the CPIN,  Bangladesh,  Sexual  orientation
    and gender identity, cited above.  This states at 4.7.1:

         "Nearly 90 per cent  of  Bangladesh's  population  is  Muslim,  and
         sexual activity of any nature outside of a (heterosexual)  marriage
         is prohibited under Sharia."

    Irrespective of whether or not that is the case, this does not  address
    the issue of whether protection is  available  from  the  state.   Mere
    statement of the  position  under  Sharia  law  is  not  sufficient  to
    demonstrate the appellant would be at risk of persecution as  a  result
    of being in breach of Sharia  law.   The  grounds  of  appeal  to  this
    tribunal are as follows:

         "One would not  need  Judicial  guidance  or  country  guidance  to
         establish that punishment under Sharia Law for any sexual  activity
         outside marriage and any activity  that  is  not  heterosexual,  is
         simply the death penalty".

    It is for the appellant, upon whom the burden of proof lies, albeit  to
    the lower standard, to demonstrate that  she  will  be,  on  return,  a
    Muslim subject to Sharia law in Bangladesh and that, as a  result,  she
    is at real risk of being persecuted as a result of her  sexuality.  Her
    witness statement makes no reference to her religion, albeit she refers
    to being from a religious  family  (with  whom  she  is  no  longer  in
    contact).

19. Dr Mahmood submitted that the FTTJ had failed to  have  regard  to  the
    respondent's CPIN, Bangladesh:  Women  fearing  gender-based  violence,
    version 2.0, published in  January  2018.  He  did  not  refer  to  any
    particular part of the CPIN as being relevant to the  FTTJ's  decision-
    making. Nor did he identify how the absence of  consideration  of  this
    CPIN was material to the outcome. There is  no  specific  reference  to
    this CPIN in the decision of the FTTJ, only to  the  CPIN  relating  to
    sexual orientation and gender identity. I do not criticise the FTTJ for
    this:  lesbians  are  not  identified  at  paragraph  4.3  as  being  a
    disadvantaged group of women in Bangladesh. This CPIN has no bearing on
    the assessment of risk on return.

20. While the grounds of appeal to  this  tribunal  do  not  challenge  the
    FTTJ's findings on Professor Yasmin's  report,  Dr  Mahmood  made  oral
    submissions on that issue and, for the sake of completeness, I  address
    them.   The FTTJ considered the report at [17].

21. The FTTJ found at [17] that there was "little"  in  Professor  Yasmin's
    report

         "that relates to any persecution of women  involved  in  a  female-
         female relationship except for  the  one  reference  to  a  lesbian
         couple being arrested for attempting a same-sex marriage.  However,
         upon consideration of the source (as provided  in  footnote  6)  it
         appears that the case concerned the alleged abduction  of  a  minor
         teenage girl by an older woman and that the older  woman  had  been
         charged with kidnapping as opposed to any offence relating to their
         sexual orientation.  Further, the case occurred in 2013  and  there
         is no further independent evidence to support the  contention  that
         the matter ended in prosecution or conviction  for  either  of  the
         women involved.  Consequently, I do not find the expert  report  to
         assist in persuading me that the objective  evidence  is  incorrect
         and that a lesbian  living  in  Bangladesh  would  be  at  risk  of
         persecution."

22. Dr Mahmood referred me to the second paragraph  of  Professor  Yasmin's
    report, submitting that this was sufficient to demonstrate the risk  of
    persecution of those who were openly lesbian in Bangladesh. I cite this
    paragraph in full:

         "Although there is  no  official  data  on  the  number  of  people
         belonging to the LGBT  community  in  Bangladesh,  it  is  commonly
         estimated that the number ranges from 1.6 to 4.8  million.   In  an
         overtly  religious  socio-cultural  environment  such  as  that  of
         Bangladesh, for people belonging to the LGBT community there is  no
         legal recognition or social acceptance of  their  personal  status,
         gender identity or sexual orientation and as such they  often  fall
         victims of persecution.  There is also lack of attention on part of
         the government to  ensure  protection  and  fundamental  rights  of
         people of LGBT community.  The deliberate negligence  towards  LGBT
         citizens again stems from the conservative  religious  notions  and
         the unwillingness on part of the  governments  of  all  regimes  to
         contradict those for obvious political gains and stability."

    No citations or references are provided for the  opinion  that  "people
    belonging to the LGBT community ... often fall victims of persecution".
     This statement is  not  corroborated  or  supported  by  any  research
    material,  articles  or  other  documentary  evidence.   I  reject  the
    submission  of  Dr  Mahmood  that  this  paragraph,  without  more,  is
    sufficient  to  support  the  claim  that  lesbians  are  at  risk   of
    persecution in Bangladesh. It amount to little more than mere assertion
    by the author and, in any event, refers generally  to  members  of  the
    LGBT community (which  includes  gay  and  bisexual  men  whose  sexual
    activities are criminalised) rather than lesbians, whose  situation  is
    the issue here.   Furthermore,  Professor  Yasmin  makes  a  misleading
    statement in the following paragraph where she states "The  Penal  Code
    criminalises consensual sexual intercourse between adults of  the  same
    sex".   It does not: it criminalises "carnal  intercourse  against  the
    order of nature with man, woman, or animal" where carnal intercourse is
    defined as "penetration".  She goes on to refer  to  that  Section  but
    then  refers  to  "a  colonial  approach  of  criminalising  same   sex
    relationship  ...".  Section  377   does   not   criminalise   same-sex
    relationships; it criminalises certain  sexual  acts.   In  any  event,
    Professor Yasmin accepts that "cases under s 377 is  very  rare".   She
    goes on to cite the case to which the FTTJ refers and the arrest of two
    gay men in a relationship for several  years  who  were  attempting  to
    marry.  Neither of these cases suggest lesbians are at risk  on  return
    merely as a result of being open about their sexuality.

23. The principal difficulty with Professor Yasmin's  report  is  that  she
    refers  largely  to  the  LGBT  community,  rather  than  to   lesbians
    specifically.  This is the issue of concern for the FTTJ and  it  is  a
    valid one.  Professor Yasmin refers, for example, on the third page  of
    her report to "violent attacks against secular bloggers, academics, gay
    rights activist, foreigners, and members  of  religious  minorities  in
    recent years".  This is of no relevance to the appellant who  does  not
    claim to be any of these.  On the same  page  Professor  Yasmin  states
    "throughout 2016 the levels  of  violence  and  threat  from  religious
    radicals that LGBT people have been exposed to have exponentially risen
    and the State has  not  offered  protection".   This  does  not  relate
    specifically to lesbians.  The  citation  for  this  statement  is  the
    International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and  Intersex  Association:
    Carroll, A. and Mendos, L.R., State Sponsored Homophobia 2017: A  world
    survey of sexual  orientation  laws:  criminalisation,  protection  and
    recognition (Geneva; ILGA, May 2017).  This  report  does  not  cite  a
    source for this statement. In any event, this latter report  refers  on
    page 37 to the application of Section 377 being to males only, contrary
    to the appellant's claim.

24. The main thrust of Professor Yasmin's report is that some of those  who
    have been active as regards LGBT rights, including lesbian rights, have
    been subjected to mistreatment. This opinion is not applicable  to  the
    appellant or to lesbians  generally  in  Bangladesh.   There  are  also
    references to the arrest in May 2017  of  "27  youths  in  a  community
    centre near Dhaka on suspicion of being gay".   These  arrests  do  not
    assist in the assessment of risk to lesbians.  Professor Yasmin  refers
    to "these incidents" as exacerbating "the negative social and religious
    notions criminalising homosexuality in Bangladesh" but lesbian  sex  is
    not criminalised and this statement has no relevance here.

25. Of some relevance  is  Professor  Yasmin's  comment  that  "members  of
    Bangladesh's  LGBT  community  [are]  regularly  receiving  threatening
    messages via telephone, text, and social  media  from  various  radical
    Islamist groups" (Professor Yasmin's emphasis). This accords  with  the
    appellant's own evidence of threats made to  her  in  Bangladesh  as  a
    result of a lesbian relationship. However, this does not, without more,
    amount to persecution, merely discrimination and  harassment  which  is
    accepted  by  the  respondent  as  being  an  issue  for  lesbians   in
    Bangladesh.

26. Professor Yasmin comments that "the situation for people  who  identify
    as LGBT in Bangladesh has taken a turn for the  worst  [sic]  over  the
    last two years. Repeated  threats,  killings,  arrests  and  continuous
    harassment  by  the  police  have  shattered  Dhaka's  fledgling   LGBT
    community. Some of them are in hiding, living  double  lives  to  avoid
    reprisals. Others chose to flee abroad,  either  on  their  own  or  by
    seeking asylum."   This  statement  does  not  relate  specifically  to
    lesbians albeit they are included in the  general  term  "LGBT".  Given
    that sexual acts between gay men are criminalised, this general opinion
    is insufficient to demonstrate, even on the  lower  standard  of  proof
    applicable here, that lesbians are subjected to persecution.

27. While Professor Yasmin summarises her report by stating "for a gay or a
    lesbian  person  living  in  Bangladesh,  there  is  a  high  risk   of
    persecution" that is not a statement which is grounded in  the  content
    of her report. Indeed her report, insofar as she refers to articles and
    other sources, is remarkably similar to the content of the respondent's
    CPIN.  She merely draws a different conclusion to the respondent on the
    basis of similar material.  Her opinion as to the  risk  on  return  is
    unsustainable on the basis of the limited material she  cites  relating
    to the circumstances for lesbians in Bangladesh.

28. In summary, the FTTJ's finding at [17] that the expert report "did  not
    assist in persuading [her] that the objective  evidence  was  incorrect
    and  that  a  lesbian  living  in  Bangladesh  would  be  at  risk   of
    persecution" is sustainable on the evidence before her:  she  preferred
    the submission for the respondent that the "lack of criminalisation  of
    the act of female-female sexual relations means that there is  no  risk
    to the appellant of persecution from any state actor upon her return as
    a result of her  sexual  orientation".    Furthermore,  the  background
    material makes it clear that there  is  sufficiency  of  protection  as
    regards the activities of non-state actors.

29. In summary, the FTTJ found, on sustainable grounds, that the  appellant
    had not demonstrated she met the HJ (Iran) test at stage (b).  This  is
    a finding which is grounded in the background material before her. That
    background material does not demonstrate  that  lesbians  who  are  not
    active in LGBT rights are at real risk of persecution on the grounds of
    their sexuality. As the  respondent  concedes,  they  are  at  risk  of
    discrimination and harassment but this is not sufficient to  amount  to
    persecution.  There was no need for the FTTJ to go on to the assessment
    at stage (c). In any event, even if she had done  so,  the  appellant's
    evidence about her behaviour as a lesbian on return  is  very  limited:
    she gave no oral evidence, the hearing being on submissions  only,  and
    her witness statement contains no specific evidence as to  whether  she
    would wish to live openly as a lesbian on return. She says  only  this:
    "It gives me a great sense of security to live freely regardless of  my
    sexuality in UK. In Bangladesh, a gay blogger was hacked  to  death  in
    broad daylight and neither the society nor my family has any  tolerance
    for homosexuality. All I want is a normal life without fear of  death."
    While it could be inferred that the appellant would wish to live openly
    in Bangladesh as a lesbian, as she has done in  the  UK,  this  is  not
    specifically stated. As Lord Hope says at paragraph 35(c) of HJ (Iran),
    "the fact that the applicant will not be able to do in the  country  of
    his nationality everything that he can do openly in the  country  whose
    protection he seeks is not the test."

30. For these reasons, I am satisfied the FTTJ's decision does not  contain
    a material error of law.  The  FTTJ's  findings  are  grounded  in  the
    evidence and background material. They are sustainable and open to her.

Decision

31. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  no
    material error of law.

32. The decision of the FTTJ stands. This appeal is dismissed.

33. Given my references to the appellant's sexuality, she  is  entitled  to
    anonymity in these proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated:  24 June 2019



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated:  24 June 2019
