
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11665/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th September 2019               |On 25th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                   [W N T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi, Counsel instructed by J M Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Cameroon.  He arrived in the UK on 18
    December 2012 having successfully applied for a visa to study in the UK
    valid until 14 May 2016. He subsequently made a claim for asylum that
    was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out in a decision
    dated 21 September 2018. The appellant's appeal was allowed, on human
    rights grounds, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett for the reasons
    set out in a decision promulgated on 28th March 2019.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 2. A brief summary of the matters relied upon by the appellant in support
    of his claim for international protection is set out at paragraph [10]
    of the decision of the FtT judge.  The judge found, at [10], that it is
    reasonably likely that the appellant was of some interest to the
    authorities between 2005 and 2008. The only reason given is that the
    appellant "... Has given detailed evidence about the arrests and
    detentions.".  The judge considered the appellant's account that his
    family home was then visited twice by the police in November and
    December 2017 and considered the warrant of arrest relied upon by the
    applicant.  At paragraph [13], the judge states:


         "I was not satisfied that the appellant has shown there has been
         any interest in him in Cameroon since 2008 as I do not accept the
         arrest warrant is a reliable document as it is incomplete, and no
         summons has been produced requiring him to attend court. I do
         accept it is reasonably likely he was active prior to coming to the
         UK but not that he is now in fear of ill-treatment on return as I
         do not believe there has been any interest in him since 2008. I
         take into account that the appellant failed to seek protection on
         arrival."

 3. At paragraphs [14] to [15] of the decision, the judge considers the
    Article 8 claim, and sets out briefly, her reasons for allowing the
    appeal on human rights grounds.


The appeals before me


 4. The appellant claims that at the conclusion of the respondent's
    submissions, the judge stated that the appeal would be allowed with
    written reasons to follow. It is said that clarification was sought as
    to the basis upon which the appeal was to be allowed, and the judge
    indicated that it was on asylum grounds. The appellant claims that
    there is no power to revise or revoke the decision given orally at the
    hearing of the appeal, and in the alternative, the written reasons in
    relation to the asylum and humanitarian protection claim, are infected
    by material errors of law. The appellant claims that in reaching the
    decision, the judge fails to have any regard to material evidence that
    was before the Tribunal.


 5. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Scott Baker on 23rd May
    2019.  In granting permission, the judge noted:


         "3.  The judgement consists of four pages being 17 paragraphs in
         all. There was no indication as to what evidence had been before
         the judge, nor any indication that the judge stated that the appeal
         would be allowed on asylum grounds.

         4.   The judge made a finding at [10] that the appellant had come
         to the attention of the authorities in Cameroon between 2005 and
         2008 and accepted that he had been detained but gave arguably
         insufficient reasons for these findings. Whilst the appeal was
         allowed on human rights grounds there are arguably insufficient
         reasons and an absence of a considerations to whether it would be
         reasonable for his British child to leave the UK.

         5.   In the circumstances of these grounds it is also arguable that
         the failure by the Judge to produce a detailed judgement setting
         out the procedure at the hearing and what evidence was considered,
         is arguably an error of law."

 6. I refer to those observations because when granting permission, FtT
    Scott Baker was not only concerned about the way in which the claim for
    international protection had been determined, but also, at paragraph
    [4], was concerned that there were arguably insufficient reasons for
    allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.


 7. Under cover of a letter dated 18th September 2019, the respondent has
    belatedly provided the Tribunal with a Rule 24 response. The respondent
    confirms that the respondent does not oppose the appeal. The respondent
    has provided a copy of the Presenting Officer's minute dated 1st April
    2019, that confirms that following the submissions made by the
    Presenting Officer, the judge announced that she was going to allow the
    appeal on asylum grounds, and indicated that the appeal was unlikely to
    be allowed on Article 8 grounds. That is broadly in line with the
    position set out by the appellant.  The respondent accepts that in
    light of the guidance of the Vice President in PAA (FtT: Oral decision
    - written reasons) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00013 (IAC), where a FtT judge
    gives a decision orally at a hearing, that is the decision on the
    appeal and there is no power to revise or revoke the decision later. If
    the written decision when issued, is inconsistent with the oral
    decision, both decisions, being decisions of the Tribunal, stand until
    set aside by a court of competent jurisdiction; but neither party is
    entitled to enforce either decision until the matter has been sorted
    out on appeal.


 8. The respondent claims that the member of staff who processed the
    decision when the written decision was received by the respondent, was
    unaware of the oral decision, and so treated the appeal as one allowed
    on Article 8 grounds only. The respondent has acted on that decision,
    and the appellant has been granted 30 months leave to remain on 27th
    June 2019.  The respondent claims that it is apparent that the judge
    has failed to give adequate reasons for allowing the appeal on asylum
    grounds, as no reasons were provided when the oral decision was handed
    down at the hearing of the appeal, and the written reasons point to the
    claim for international protection being dismissed. The respondent
    therefore seeks permission to appeal against the oral decision to allow
    the appeal on asylum grounds and seeks an extension of time to do so.


 9. On behalf of the respondent Mr Mills accepts that there has been a
    significant delay in making an application for permission to appeal. He
    submits that the reason for that delay is explained by the unusual
    circumstances of this case, in that the respondent believed that the
    appeal had been allowed on human rights grounds only and has acted on
    that decision. He submits that it is entirely understandable that the
    member of staff who processed the decision when the written decision
    was received, was unaware of the oral decision to allow the appeal on
    asylum grounds, and it is in the interests of justice for an extension
    of time to be granted.


10. In reply, Mr Azmi opposes the application for an extension of time, and
    submits that the appeal should be allowed on asylum grounds, as that is
    what First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett had decided and intended to do.
    He submits that there has been a significant failure on the part of the
    respondent to make an application for permission to appeal in a timely
    manner, and there is no good reason for that delay. He submits that
    there was correspondence that passed between the appellant's
    representatives and the respondent drawing the matter to the attention
    of the respondent. He referred me to correspondence sent by the
    appellant's representatives to the FtT on 3 June 2019 requesting a
    transcript of the proceedings, and to correspondence sent by the
    appellant's representatives to the respondent on 19th June 2019, 4th
    July 2019 and 5th September 2019, in which the applicant's
    representatives invite the respondent to confirm that the intention was
    that the appellant's appeal would be allowed on asylum grounds.


11. I grant the respondent permission to appeal, out of time. In reaching
    that decision I have had regard to the matters set out in the Joint
    Presidential Guidance 2019 No 1; Permission to appeal to UTIAC.  In
    considering whether to exercise discretion to extend time for seeking
    permission to appeal I apply the three stage approach commended by the
    Court of Appeal in Mitchell -v- News Group Newspapers Ltd [2013] EWCA
    Civ 1537, Denton -v- White [2014] EWCA Civ 906 and R (Hysaj) -v- SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1633.


12. Mr Mills candidly accepts that there has been a serious and significant
    failure to comply with the time limit by the respondent.  I have
    considered whether there is a good reason for the delay. I have
    carefully read the decision of FtT Judge Grimmett, and there is not
    even a hint in that decision, that the judge had reached any decision
    immediately after the hearing of the appeal on 1 March 2018, that she
    had handed down. Nowhere in the decision does the judge even indicate
    that at the conclusion of the hearing, she had informed the parties
    that the asylum appeal was allowed, and her reasons would follow in
    writing, in due course. It is perhaps unsurprising that an individual
    reading that decision would simply assume that the appeal had been
    allowed on human rights grounds only.  Here, the respondent accepted
    the decision of the judge to allow the appeal on human rights grounds
    and acted on that decision by granting the appellant 30 months leave to
    remain. I accept that the applicant's representatives were subsequently
    in correspondence with the respondent, and it would have been
    preferable for an application for permission to appeal to have been
    made earlier. In PAA (FtT: Oral decision - written reasons) Iraq, the
    Vice President confirmed that both the oral decision and the written
    decisions of the Tribunal stand, but neither party is entitled to
    enforce either decision until the matter has been sorted out on appeal.
     The appellant is therefore unable to enforce the oral decision to
    allow the appeal on asylum grounds until the matter is resolved by this
    appeal.


13. In my judgement, it is in the interests of justice, considering all of
    the circumstances of this case for me to grant an extension of time to
    the respondent. Here, it is common ground between the parties that the
    judge did not give any reasons at all for allowing the appeal on asylum
    grounds at the conclusion of the hearing. The respondent is entitled to
    know the basis upon which the asylum claim has succeeded.  The written
    decision of the FtT judge in fact points the other way. The judge was
    not satisfied that the appellant has shown there has been any interest
    in the appellant in Cameroon since 2008, and she found the arrest
    warrant relied upon by the appellant, to be an unreliable document. The
    judge expressly rejects the appellant's account that he is now in fear
    of ill-treatment on return, and she did not believe there to have been
    any interest in him since 2008.


14. Mr Azmi accepts, rightly in my judgement, that there is nothing set out
    within the decision of the FtT Judge, upon which I could simply
    conclude that there is a material error of law in the written decision,
    and remake the decision in favour of the appellant upon the findings of
    fact made.  The findings of fact made by the judge in fact all weigh
    against the appellant. Furthermore, the appellant claims that in
    reaching that decision, the judge failed to have regard to other
    evidence that was before the Tribunal.


15. It is simply impossible to know why the judge decided at the hearing of
    the appeal that the appeal against the decision to refuse the asylum
    claim is allowed.  It is inevitable therefore that the proper course is
    for the decision of FtT Judge Grimmett to be set aside, and for the
    appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his claim for
    international protection, to be decided afresh by the FtT.


16. There is no appeal by the respondent against the decision to allow the
    appeal on article 8 grounds and that decision stands.



Decision:


17. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett promulgated on 28th
    March 2019 in respect of the appellant's appeal against the decision to
    refuse his claim for asylum is set aside and remitted for rehearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal afresh with no findings preserved.  The
    parties will be notified of a hearing date in due course.


18. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett promulgated on 28th
    March 2019 allowing the appeal on human rights grounds (for the reasons
    set out at paragraphs 14 to 15 of the decision) shall stand.


Signed                                  Date          23rd September 2019

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


