
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/11086/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport           | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 February 2018                        | On 20 March 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     LST
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O James, of Counsel instructed by Asylum Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Walker who, in a determination promulgated on 1
    June 2017, dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse his claim for asylum.

2.  The judge noted the appellant's evidence in  paragraphs  16  onwards  of
    the determination. The appellant had said that he was a Roman  Catholic
    and a member of the Chagga tribe - one of the most  trusted  tribes  in
    Tanzania.  He said that his parents had spread  rumours  about  him  in
    Tanzania that they believed him to be gay but he was  not.   The  judge
    noted that the appellant had been diagnosed  with  moderate  depressive
    disorder and his fear of returning home "empty handed".  He  noted  the
    appellant claimed to have followed CUF, and that the appellant had  had
    a relationship here and that he had a daughter,  born  on  11  November
    2011,  but that his relationship had broken down  and he had  not  seen
    his child since 2013.  The judge placed weight on  a  determination  of
    Immigration Judge Rowlands who had dismissed a previous appeal made  by
    the appellant in 2014.

3.   The judge noted that  at  the  hearing  the  appellant  claimed  to  be
    bisexual.

4.   In paragraphs 58 onwards  the  judge  set  out  his  findings  and  his
    conclusions.  He considered the evidence of the appellant but  did  not
    find his claim to be bisexual credible nor did the judge find that  the
    appellant would face persecution on return to Tanzania.

5.   When considering the rights of the appellant under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR, the judge noted that his relationship with his daughter's  mother
    had broken down and that the appellant was, he considered, unlikely  to
    be able to re-establish contact with his former partner  and  daughter.
    He noted that the appellant has relatives here including his father but
    said  that  those  relationships  were  highly   problematic   as   the
    appellant's father had evicted him from his house.  In paragraph 71 the
    judge said that the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules under paragraph 276ADE because he did not meet the long residence
    Rules and he had failed to establish that he had  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted solely on the issue of whether or  not
    the judge had erred in his consideration of the rights of the appellant
    under Article 8,  and  in  particular  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE.  It was stated that the judge might have erred by having failed
    to give  consideration  as  to  whether  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into Tanzania.

7.   That issue was the sole issue on which permission was granted and  that
    was accepted by Mr James.  He stated that there  was  evidence  of  the
    appellant's depression and that there was a letter  from  Primary  Care
    indicating that he might need support and argued that  the  appellant's
    physical symptoms might affect his ability to reintegrate into  society
    in Tanzania.  Mr James submitted that it was a material  error  of  law
    for the judge not to have considered the issue  of  reintegration.   He
    added that the judge had found that the appellant  was  not  exercising
    family life here whereas Judge Rowlands, in 2014,  had  found  that  he
    was.

8.   Mr Richards stated that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  issue  of
    significant obstacles had been pleaded in the grounds  of  appeal,  nor
    argued  before  the  judge  and  therefore  the  judge  should  not  be
    criticised for not dealing with that point.  In paragraphs  68  onwards
    the judge had  properly  considered  the  appellant's  family  life  in
    Britain and considered all relevant factors. In  paragraph  67  he  had
    properly considered the issue of the appellant's health.  The appellant
    had stated that he could receive counselling in Tanzania.  Mr  Richards
    asked me to find there was no material error in the determination.

Discussion

9.   The judge properly set out all the relevant factors in this  case.   He
    had before him evidence of the length of time the appellant  had  lived
    in Britain -  he  had  come  to  Britain  in  2006,  he  had  formed  a
    relationship here but that  relationship  had  broken  up.   The  judge
    found, and indeed it  was  not  challenged,  that  he  would  not  face
    persecution on return  to  Tanzania  and  indeed,  the  judge  had  not
    accepted that the appellant was bisexual.

10.  While it is the case that the judge had not  considered  the  issue  of
    insurmountable obstacles in the appellant's reintegration into Tanzania
    under paragraph 276ADE(vi) I do not consider that that  is  a  material
    error as the judge was faced with  a  man  whose  depression  could  be
    treated in Tanzania, who was aged 27 when he came to Britain,  and  had
    some history of working in Tanzania and had tribal links there.   There
    was simply nothing before the judge to indicate that there would be any
    obstacles to the appellant  reintegrating  into  life  in  Tanzania  on
    return.  While I note Mr James' point that  Judge  Rowlands  had  found
    that the appellant was exercising family life here, the reality  is  of
    course that that was not argued before Judge Walker.  Judge Walker  had
    clearly taken into account the fact that the  appellant's  relationship
    with his former partner  here  had  broken  up  some  years  ago.   The
    appellant had not had contact with his  daughter  since  2013  and  his
    relationship with his father here had fractured.

11.   I therefore find that there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the judge in the First-tier.  I would add that even if
    I had set aside his  decision  and  considered  the  issue  afresh,  in
    addition to the reasons set out above, I would have placed  weight   on
    the fact that the appellant has lived in Britain without authority  and
    therefore the provisions of Section 117(B) of the 2002 Act  would  come
    into play as little weight should have  been  placed  on  private  life
    built up at a time when the appellant's stay here  was  precarious  and
    therefore have dismissed the appeal.

12.  As I have found no material error of law in the  determination  I  find
    that the determination of the First-tier Judge shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:  [pic]                          Date: 17 March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
