
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11643/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2018                          |On 08 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     CMS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person, assisted by Mr D Forbes
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ferguson promulgated on  25  January  2018  in  which  he  refused  the
    Appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  30
    October 2007 refusing protection in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  10  October  1976.   She
    has a daughter, M, born in the United Kingdom on 30 March 2009 who is a
    dependent in these proceedings.  Although at one point in the materials
    it was suggested that M was a British citizen, there is no evidence for
    this and she has been treated on the basis that she  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria having taken the citizenship of her mother.

3.   The focus of the arguments before the  Upper  Tribunal  relate  to  the
    circumstances of the Appellant's child.

4.   The Appellant's protection claim was rejected in clear and  unambiguous
    terms by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and is not a 'live' issue before
    me.  In such circumstances I do not propose  to  set  out  in  complete
    detail the full immigration history of the Appellant, or indeed all the
    details of her asylum claim.   For  present  purposes  I  set  out  the
    following summary.

5.   The Appellant first came to the United Kingdom in  2004  with  a  visit
    visa; there are records of further visit visas having been obtained  in
    Lagos in January 2005  and  May  2007,  although  the  Appellant  -  in
    testimony that has been rejected - claimed that she was not responsible
    for the making of those later applications.  The Appellant  claimed  to
    have been trafficked and exploited whilst in the United Kingdom.  It is
    not disputed that she was removed from the United Kingdom in 2007,  nor
    is it disputed that she returned to the United Kingdom in January  2008
    in a different identity.  In this regard the Appellant claimed that she
    had again been trafficked to the UK, but shortly thereafter escaped the
    people who had trafficked her.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge, as had the Secretary of State,  rejected
    the Appellant's claims in respect of trafficking.

7.   The Appellant has remained in the United Kingdom since her re-entry  in
    January 2008. In September  2012  she  obtained  a  passport  from  the
    Nigerian Embassy in London in her current identity.

8.   The Appellant gave birth to her daughter during this time.  It is  said
    that the father of M has no ongoing contact,  and  has  no  involvement
    with the child's life.

9.   The Appellant made an application for an EU residence card as a  spouse
    in May 2013. The application was refused in March 2014,  and  in  April
    2014 the Appellant was served with papers as an  overstayer.   A  human
    rights claim was made in  July  2015,  but  was  subsequently  'voided'
    because the Appellant made her application for asylum  at  the  end  of
    July 2015.  The asylum interview was conducted in November 2015 and  in
    due course the application for protection was refused for  reasons  set
    out in the Respondent's 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated  30
    October 2017.

10.  The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

11.  Before the First-tier Tribunal she pursued her case on both  protection
    grounds and family/private life Article  8  grounds.   In  this  latter
    context particular emphasis was put on the circumstances of M  who  had
    been born in the United Kingdom and had never left the United Kingdom.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge refused the appeal  on  all  grounds  for
    reasons set out in his Decision and Reasons.

13.  The Appellant sought permission to appeal.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Birrell on 1 May  2018.   Although
    the application was made out of time, extension of time was granted.

14.  In material part the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is in these terms:

         "3.  The grounds assert that the Judge erred in his  assessment  of
             s117B 6 was flawed in that he  failed  to  identify  the  best
             interests of the Appellant's child in making that assessment.


         4.   In what is otherwise a detailed decision it is  arguable  that
             in addressing the  Appellant's  child's  circumstances,  which
             included some medical issues, the Judge failed to specifically
             identity what the best interests of  the  child  were  and  in
             doing so his assessment under s 117B6 was flawed."

15.  I pause to note that there is a nuanced difference  between  the  basis
    of the grant of permission, and the pleaded  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    written grounds submit  that  the  Judge  failed  to  approach  section
    117B(6) as "a self-contained provision", and - notwithstanding a  self-
    direction pursuant to the decision of MA (Pakistan) - the Judge  failed
    to   evaluate   'best   interests'   separately   before    considering
    proportionality, but rather "fully intertwined" the two.   The grant of
    permission to appeal is more specifically focused on it being  arguable
    that there was a discreet error in  evaluating  'best  interests'.   Be
    that as it may, whichever way the appeal is considered I  have  reached
    the conclusion that there is no sufficient substance to warrant setting
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  In the premises it is helpful to  have  regard  to  the  materials  and
    evidence that were before the First-tier Tribunal Judge with regard  to
    matters that might touch upon the best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    child.

         (i) There was a witness statement from the Appellant signed  on  31
         November 2017.  For  the  main  part  that  statement  relates  and
         addresses the immigration history, the different identities used by
         the Appellant, and the substance of her asylum claim.   In  respect
         of the Appellant's child, the following appears:-

             "My daughter was born here and has lived all  her  life  here.
             She is 8 years old and she has recently  been  diagnosed  with
             ADHD.  She is receiving special treatment via the  school  and
             the psychologist".

         (I note that paragraph 22  of  the  decision  summarises  what  the
         Appellant had said in  her  witness  statement  as  regard  matters
         relevant to Article 8, and makes  some  further  reference  to  the
         supporting materials that were filed in the Appellant's bundle.)

         (ii) The Appellant's appeal bundle included a number  of  documents
         in relation to the schooling of M and the concerns expressed by the
         school in  respect  of  challenging  behaviour  which  resulted  in
         further  consideration  and  investigation  of  behaviour  and  any
         underlying concerns.  These materials are set  out  and  adequately
         summarised in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  in
         particular at paragraph 29 which is in the following terms:

             "The medical evidence about [M] is summarised in a letter from
             Dr Jackson following a referral from the SENCo at her  primary
             school who had concerns about  her  being  very  active,  with
             difficulties  in  concentrating  and  focussing  on  work  and
             struggling with friendships  and  social  norms.   The  report
             records that [the Appellant] said that "parents originate from
             Nigeria.  They are separated and mum does not know much  about
             dad's family history  or  his  health".   The  paediatrician's
             summary of the examination is that "[M]  is  a  girl  who  has
             challenging behaviour at school and at  home  and  school  are
             very concerned.  They report difficulties  with  concentration
             and hyperactivity.  Physical examination is unremarkable.  The
             plan for [M] is to refer to  audiology,  Vanderbilt  behaviour
             questionnaires, obtain report from school and review again  in
             clinic in three months  time."   That  is  the  most  detailed
             medical evidence and it is from 2016.   There  is  no  medical
             evidence of any further diagnosis or  treatment.   The  school
             reports she has behavioural problems which are  being  managed
             with a high  level  of  adult  support,  mentoring,  behaviour
             support and a referral to the education psychologist."

         (I pause to note that no criticism has been made as to the accuracy
         or completeness of that summary.  It  is  not  suggested  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  omitted  any  relevant  factors  in
         rehearsing the evidence that was before him as  to  the  particular
         issues and difficulties that M was experiencing in pursuit  of  her
         education and the  nature  of  the  assistance  that  the  evidence
         suggested she was receiving.)

         (iii) The Judge also recorded aspects of the oral evidence that was
         before him, both in respect of the protection  issues  and  in  the
         context of the circumstances  of  M.   Accordingly,  the  following
         appears at paragraph 8:


             "[The Appellant] said that her child would not get the support
             she needed for her education in Nigeria and she did  not  have
             money to pay for hospital treatment or school fees".


         (iv) The Appellant's submissions in the appeal  are  summarised  at
         paragraph 11. In respect of M the following appears:

             "I have problems with my daughter.  She has ADHD.  It  affects
             me because whenever I take her out she insists that I buy  her
             something.  The school helped me to see this.  If  I  returned
             to Nigeria I would not get proper  help  with  her.   She  has
             psychologist to help her here."

17.  With the assistance of Mr Forbes -  and  emphasising  uncontroversially
    that the  'best  interests'  of  M  were  to  be  taken  as  a  primary
    consideration or starting point the Appellant argued  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in taking the  evidential  matters  set  out  above
    forward failed to make any clear  evaluation  of  M's  best  interests.
    Moreover, it was argued that the Judge elided the circumstances of  the
    child  and  any  consideration  of  best  interests  with  the  adverse
    immigration history of the Appellant.

18.  Mr Mills, on behalf of the Respondent, acknowledged  that  there  might
    be scope for criticising the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  not  setting
    out the decision with the clarity of structure suggested in cases  such
    as MA and Kaur. However, he submitted that  the  Appellant's  challenge
    was really one of form not substance, and that it was adequately  clear
    looking at the decision as a whole that the Judge  had  had  regard  to
    best interests,  had  considered  'reasonableness'  in  isolation  when
    evaluating section 117B(6), and had reached a  decision  that  did  not
    offend against  principle  or  authority,  including  the  most  recent
    judgment of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).

19.  Pursuant to the observations of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Birrell  in
    granting permission to appeal, and Mr Mills' acknowledgement as to  the
    form and structure of  the  decision,  I  accept  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has not in terms included an express  statement  of  any
    finding of what is  in  M's  best  interests.   However,  on  the  very
    particular facts of this case, and bearing in mind the way in which the
    decision is otherwise set out, I do not accept that any such deficiency
    could be said to constitute a material error of law.

20.  In my judgement it is adequately  clear  that  this  experienced  Judge
    sitting in a specialist Tribunal is well-versed with the case  law  and
    the principles - which are cited and set out in some detail in the body
    of the decision.  Indeed, the recitation of relevant materials and case
    law includes express reference to the concept of best interests.   This
    can be seen, for example, from paragraph 23 -  where  the  Judge  notes
    that consideration under section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 was set out in the RFRL.   In this context it  may
    be seen from the RFRL that section 55 is cited  at  paragraph  10,  and
    more particularly consideration is  given  at  paragraphs  93  and  94.
    Paragraph 93 is in the following terms:

         "93. In reaching this  decision,  regard  has  been  given  to  the
             welfare of your children under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 which places  a  duty  on
             the Secretary of State to make arrangements for ensuring  that
             immigration, asylum, nationality  and  customs  functions  are
             discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and  promote
             the welfare of children  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  best
             interest of the child is a primary consideration which is  not
             to be interpreted as the primary  consideration  or  even  the
             paramount consideration, as confirmed within  section  1.1  of
             the document entitled 'UNHCR  Guidelines  on  Determining  the
             Best Interests of the Child' which provides that '... the best
             interest must be a primary consideration (but  not  the  sole)
             consideration for all other actions  affecting  children  ...'
             ...".

     Paragraph 94 goes  on  to  cite  passages  from  the  headnote  in  E-A
    (Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315  (IAC).



21.  The Judge also makes reference to the Respondent's  policy  in  respect
    of paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules
    (paragraph 27).  The Judge sets out relevant  considerations  in  full,
    but in particular the following appears:-

         "Relevant considerations are likely to include:


         ...


         ii.      whether the child would be leaving with its parent(a)?  It
             is generally the case that it is in a child's bests to  remain
             with its parents.   Unless  specific  factors  apply  it  will
             generally not be unreasonable to expect a child to  leave  the
             country with its parents, particularly if the parents have not
             right to remain in the UK".

22.  Further, at paragraph 31 the Judge has reference  to  the  decision  of
    Kaur (children's best interests/public interest interface) [2017]  UKUT
    00014 (IAC).

23.  In all such circumstances I do not accept that the Judge somehow  'lost
    sight' of the concept of best interests, or that the decision otherwise
    gives rise to concern that the Judge did not understand the concept, or
    did not have regard to it in the overall consideration of the appeal.

24.  More particularly, it is manifestly clear that the Judge  took  account
    of the factors being advanced by the Appellant as potentially impacting
    on the welfare and best interests of her child -  and  addressed  those
    matters.  I have already rehearsed those aspects of the evidence  which
    the Judge set out as representing the substance of the Appellant's case
    as it realted to the circumstances of M: it is not suggested  that  the
    Judge omitted or  overlooked  any  relevant  detail;  as  such,  in  my
    judgement, it is clear that the Judge had full regard to  the  evidence
    and materials that were before  him.   Moreover,  the  Judge  addressed
    these matters - they were not set out as some sort of rote rehearsal.

25.  It is to be recalled that best interests of a child  are  only  ever  a
    starting point in  the  context  of  immigration  decisions.   What  is
    significantly pertinent is the extent to which the best interests might
    be adversely impacted by  the  challenged  immigration  decision.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  clearly  considered  the  impact  of   the
    immigration decision on the circumstances of M,  did  so  in  isolation
    from the impact on the circumstances of  the  mother,  and  did  so  in
    isolation of any  consideration  of  the  immigration  history  of  the
    mother.

26.  I have already rehearsed the substance of paragraph 29 with  regard  to
    the circumstances of M;  the Judge then said this at paragraph 30:

     "There may well be a difference in the education and  support  services
         between what [M] is receiving in the UK and what she would be  able
         to access in Nigeria.  That was not established by reference to any
         evidence provided by the Appellant.  Nor are the full circumstances
         of [the Appellant's] life in Nigeria established.  As set out above
         she has not been truthful  about  the  circumstances  of  her  life
         before she came to the UK.  She had sufficiently  strong  ties  for
         her to be granted multiple visit visas however, and was in  contact
         with her family in 2011 when her father  was  responsible  for  her
         customary  marriage.   It  is  established  that  there   will   be
         disruption to [M's] education but it will be temporary until she is
         able to engage in education in  the  country  of  her  nationality,
         where she will be with her mother."

27.  It seems to me abundantly clear that  in  paragraph  30  the  Judge  is
    taking into account that it has not been established  that  M  will  be
    returning to Nigeria in adverse circumstances.  It is not accepted that
    the Appellant has shown that the life to which she  will  be  returning
    with M has any features which might be considered to be adverse because
    it is not accepted that the Appellant has been truthful at any stage as
    to her circumstances in Nigeria.  The Judge also notes that he was  not
    shown any evidence to  suggest  that  the  educational  facilities  and
    support network that would be available in Nigeria would inevitably  be
    different from that which is available to  the  M  in  the  UK  (albeit
    realistically  observing   that   there   might   be   a   difference).
    Accordingly, the Judge concludes in a manner which in my judgement  was
    open to him on the evidence that the only impact upon  the  Appellant's
    daughter of leaving the UK to return to Nigeria with her  mother  would
    be the disruption to education - which would be  temporary  until  such
    time as M was able to  engage  in  education  in  the  country  of  her
    nationality.

28.  Accordingly, what the Judge found in substance  was  that  it  had  not
    been shown that  the  interests  of  M  were  going  to  be  materially
    adversely impacted beyond  the  temporary  disruption  inherent  in  an
    international relocation.  It seems to me that that was to encompass an
    evaluation of best interests and a consideration of the factors  raised
    by the Appellant in  respect  of  M.  This  approach  also  echoes  the
    guidance that I have cited above, which  tasks  a  decision-maker  with
    considering whether there are any specific factors that apply  such  as
    to make it unreasonable to expect a child to leave the  United  Kingdom
    with a parent or parents.

29.  Indeed this is the substance of the  conclusion  that  follows  in  the
    opening sentence of paragraph 31: "It has not been established  by  the
    Appellant that it would 'not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
    the UK'".  It seems to me that such a finding was entirely open to  the
    Judge, and has been reached taking into  account  the  interest  -  and
    necessarily therefore the 'best interests' - of M.

30.  I remind myself in this context that the Judge's  approach  appears  to
    be entirely consistent with the decision in KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC
    53.

31.  In KO relevant guidance is cited which includes the following - "It  is
    generally the case that it is in a child's  best  interests  to  remain
    with their parent(s). Unless special factors apply, it  will  generally
    be reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK with  their  parent(s),
    particularly if the parent(s) have  no  right  to  remain  in  the  UK"
    (paragraph 10). At paragraph 18 the following appears:

     "On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems  to  me
         inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider where the parents,
         apart from the relevant provision, are expected  to  be,  since  it
         would normally be reasonable for the child to  be  with  them.   To
         that extent  the  record  of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may be give the parents a right to remain".

32.  In this context  I  note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  cited
    paragraph 17 of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705  per  Elias  J  (see
    paragraph 25); thereafter the Judge made it manifest  that  he  adopted
    this approach:

     "This is not to penalise the child  for  the  actions  of  her  mother,
         because if it was established that it would be unreasonable for [M]
         to return to Nigeria then  that  fact  would  have  outweighed  all
         others." (closing sentence of paragraph 31).

33.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Judge has had regard to  the  best
    interests of the child, has considered the impact upon the child of the
    immigration decision, has taken that impact on  the  child's  interests
    forward into an analysis of section 117B(6), has conducted an  analysis
    of section 117B(6) in a freestanding manner, has reached a  sustainable
    conclusion that the Appellant has not established that it would not  be
    reasonable to expect M to leave the  UK,  and  has  taken  that  factor
    forward into the overall Article 8 balancing exercise in the appeal.

34.  In all of the circumstances I uphold the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

35.  I was told at the hearing that  further  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    circumstances of M had been sent to the  Tribunal  and  served  on  the
    Respondent. However, at the time of the hearing any such  evidence  had
    not reached the Tribunal's file and was not before me.  Accordingly,  I
    have not seen such evidence.  In any event such evidence could form  no
    part of my consideration of the 'error of law' issue.  For completeness
    I merely observe that hereafter  it  is  a  matter  for  the  Appellant
    (perhaps with the assistance and guidance of any  advisers)  to  decide
    how to take such further evidence forward, if at all.

Notice of Decision

36.  The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ferguson  contained  no
    material error of law and stands.

37.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 5 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

