
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11919/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 19th February 2019  On 28th March 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    C H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  No appearance.
For the respondent: Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq who claimed to be a
         minor on arrival but following an age assessment by the local
         authority it was concluded he was over 18. He made an unsuccessful
         claim for protection in November 2007. His appeal was heard in
         March 2009 was dismissed on credibility grounds. He unsuccessfully
         sought to appeal that decision and subsequent submissions in May
         2014 were unsuccessful.

      2. In June 2017 he made further submissions to the effect that he was
         from Kirkuk and conditions there would breach article 15 C of the
         European Directive and to return him would breach article 3.He
         claimed that he could not live in Baghdad as he was a Sunni Kurd
         with no support. He also claimed he could not reasonably relocate
         to the IKR.Finally, he suggested he was  nonreturnable because he
         did not have documentation, notably the CSI D, necessary to avail
         of basic services and had no family members who can assist  to
         obtain a replacement.

      3. Those further representations were rejected by the respondent on 28
         September 2018. The refusal letter suggested that because of
         changes in the country the guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG
         [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) should no longer be followed.

The First tier Tribunal

      4. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup at
         Manchester on 8 November 2018. In a decision promulgated on 15
         November 2018 the appeal was dismissed. The appellant attended and
         had legal representation in bringing the appeal and producing a
         bundle but was unrepresented at hearing. The respondent was
         represented. It was accepted that he was a Sunni Muslim from Kirkuk
         and was Kurdish.

      5. The judge had regard to the information referred to in the refusal
         letter about conditions in Kirkuk. Having considered this the judge
         was not prepared to take a different view from the country guidance
         decision whereby Kirkuk is a contested area and because of the 15 C
         risk it would not be reasonable to expect the appellant to return
         there.

      6. This left two possible destinations for the appellant to establish
         himself in: Baghdad, or via it, the IKR. The judge found at
         paragraph 36 it would not be reasonable to expect him to relocate
         to Baghdad. This was because he was a Kurdish Sorani speaking Sunni
         Muslim with no contacts or family there.

      7. The judge concluded he could be expected to relocate to the IKR.
         This was a safe region and he could travel there via a transfer
         flight from Baghdad airport. The judge found he would be entitled
         to at least temporary admission and in reality would not be
         required to leave.

      8. The removal of the appellant was premised upon him being able to
         obtain the necessary documentation. The presenting officer conceded
         at the time of hearing his return was not currently feasible
         because of this. However the judge concluded he could obtain
         documentation and he had family members in Iraq who could assist.

The Upper Tribunal

      9. Permission to appeal was granted on 6 December 2018 on the basis it
         was arguable the judge failed to give reasons for finding the
         appellant could obtain the necessary documentation for his return
         and that he could live in the IKR.The permission indicated it was
         arguable the judge failed to consider whether documentation could
         be obtained within a reasonable time. It was also arguable the
         judge failed to place his ability to obtain replacement
         documentation against that background of the circumstances in
         Kirkuk and his claimed loss of contact with family members.

     10. There is a letter from the appellant's former solicitors, dated 10
         October 2018, stating they were no longer acting for him. There is
         a form of authority from another firm of solicitors dated 26
         November 2018. They were advised of the hearing. There is then a
         letter from dated 1 February 2019 indicating they are no longer
         acting.

     11. There is a rule 24 response on file dated 2 January 2019 opposing
         the appeal. Reference is made to paragraph 38 of the decision
         whereby the judge concluded the appellant could obtain
         documentation within a reasonable time or even before leaving the
         United Kingdom. The judge referred to evidence that he had
         previously provided identification documentation and that copies
         were held by his former representatives. Reference was also made to
         the adverse credibility points which impacted upon his claim to
         have lost contact with his family and no longer to have
         documentation.

Conclusions

     12. The judge went into considerable detail on the question of
         documentation. At paragraph 20 the judge recorded that after the
         appellant arrived in the United Kingdom his evidence was that his
         father had sent him his CSID and his father's employment documents.
         He indicated he gave these documents to his then legal
         representatives. He assumed they had been sent by them to the Home
         Office. However, the judge noted that neither the appellant nor
         representatives he had acting for him made any effort to contact
         the previous solicitors to find out about the documentation. The
         judge referred to the earlier appeal decision which included
         consideration of the appellant's age. In response to a local
         authority age assessment it was recorded that the appellant
         produced identification documents, albeit these were not relied
         upon. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup accepted that the appellant
         did produce some form of documentation at his appeal hearing in
         March 2009 but the case file had been destroyed.

     13. The appellant claimed he did not have contact with his father since
         2008 when the documents were sent. This was contradicted by a Red
         Cross document wherein he claimed no contact since 2007. In the
         previous appeal it was recorded that his oral evidence was that in
         March 2009 he had spoken to his father. His evidence had been that
         his father told him his mother and siblings were in Europe. This
         contradicted his claimed he had no knowledge of their whereabouts
         and had been separated from them in Turkey. The judge did not find
         his explanations credible and was not satisfied he had lost contact
         with his family.

     14. The judge referred to the previous decision whereby the appellant
         was found to lack credibility and had made a false asylum claim. At
         paragraph 29 the judge rejected the appellant's claim he lost
         contact with his father in 2008.He had been inconsistent as to what
         family he had in Iraq. The judge referred to belated contact with
         the Red Cross family tracing service and concluded that if he had
         genuinely lost contact this would have been done much earlier. The
         judge referred to an earlier reference by the appellant in a form
         dated 2014 that his maternal grandparents were Sulaimaniyah and his
         paternal grandparents in Kirkuk. He also had a maternal uncle and
         Sulaimaniyah and a paternal uncle in Kirkuk. At paragraph 32 the
         judge concluded that the appellant had not been truthful about his
         family contacts and was satisfied he has family in Iraq with whom
         he is in contact. The judge concluded they could help him obtain
         the necessary documentation.

     15. At paragraph 38 the judge concluded that he would be able to obtain
         a copy of his CSID and could do so before leaving the United
         Kingdom or at least within a short time of arrival in Iraq.

     16. I am satisfied these were findings were properly open to the judge
         and were based upon evidence. Consequently, I see no error arising
         in respect of his obtaining documentation within a reasonable time.

     17. In terms of establishing himself, the judge at paragraph 38 pointed
         out that he would not need a sponsor in the IKR as he is Kurdish
         and found he had family members living there who could vouch for
         him. The judge recorded that he was young and healthy and, with
         this family support, could reasonably expect to obtain employment.
         There was also State-based support. The judge's comments should not
         be read in a vacuum but in light of the documentation prepared for
         the appeal. Again, I find no material error of law here.

     18. In summary, I find the 2 main arguments advanced in the grounds
         namely the ability to obtain documentation and to relocate to the
         IKR do not demonstrate a material error of law. The grounds also
         raise other arguments but these are secondary to the main points
         and in many ways attempt to reargue points adequately covered by
         the judge. Overall, this is a well-constructed decision in which
         the judge demonstrates even handedness by not departing from the
         country guidance and finding Baghdad on suitable. The key issues
         are carefully analysed and proper referencing made.

Decision

The find no material error of law established. Consequently the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup dismissing the appellant's appeal shall
stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.    Date: 25th March 2019
