
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/11190/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th June 2017                          |On 15th June 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                    mr sk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  national  Afghanistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  23rd
    September 2016 refusing his  application  for  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal and the Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal  with
    permission granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek  on  20th  April
    2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  in
    January 2010 and claimed asylum upon arrival, however in March 2010 his
    asylum claim was treated as  withdrawn  as  he  absconded.   He  lodged
    further submissions six years later in  April  2016.   The  Appellant's
    claim is that he fears the Taliban and  the  Afghani  authorities.   He
    claims that his father was friends with commanders in the  Afghan  Army
    and one of his brothers worked  in  a  kitchen  for  the  International
    Security Forces in Afghanistan (ISAF) and that his  other  brother  was
    involved with the Taliban and sent films he made for the Taliban to  Al
    Jazeera.  He claims that his father and brother  have  disappeared  and
    that his brother who was involved with Taliban was  killed  along  with
    his wife and children in 2008.  The Appellant  claims  he  is  at  risk
    because the Taliban want him to join them to avenge  his  brother.   He
    also claims to fear the Afghan authorities because of  his  connections
    with his brother who was a member of the Taliban.

 3. The Respondent issued  a  detailed  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   In
    advance of the hearing the Appellant submitted a witness  statement,  a
    skeleton argument and evidence.

 4. There are four main  Grounds  of  Appeal  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  The first ground  contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge misdirected himself in law in requiring corroboration in relation
    to aspects of the Appellant's claim.  It is contended  that  the  judge
    noted throughout the determination that there is a lack of  documentary
    evidence to support aspects of the Appellant's appeal  which  indicates
    that the judge appears to have required corroboration relating  to  the
    Appellant's account.  The second ground contends that the  judge  erred
    in failing to express the reasons for his conclusions  with  sufficient
    clarity to enable the Appellant to understand why he had lost.   It  is
    contended  that  the  decision  is  characterised  by  a   failure   to
    distinguish between points advanced by the Respondent  and  conclusions
    drawn by the Tribunal.  The third  ground  contends  that  there  is  a
    failure to consider  relevant  matters  in  assessing  the  documentary
    evidence.  It is contended in particular that the judge failed to  take
    account  of  the  skeleton  argument,  the  background  evidence,   the
    Appellant's witness statement or the oral evidence.  The fourth  ground
    contends that the judge overlooked or failed to  take  account  of  the
    evidence relevant to internal relocation and state protection.

 5. In  granting  permission  to  appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek
    considered that it is arguable that there is a lack of clarity  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge in terms of what his findings
    were as distinct from what the Respondent's  conclusions  were  in  the
    reasons for refusal  letter.   In  his  view  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's seeming rolling assessment of credibility from the beginning of
    his decision interspersed with  what  appear  to  be  the  Respondent's
    conclusions, render his decision arguably flawed for lack  of  clarity.
    He also considered that the other grounds were arguable.

Error of Law

 6. At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Blundell  helpfully  went  through  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal paragraph by paragraph side by side
    with the reasons for refusal letter.  I accept his submissions that the
    judge's decision mirrors almost exactly the reasons for refusal  letter
    from paragraphs 2 to 68.  Apart from the final three sentences  at  the
    end of paragraph 8, paragraphs 2 to 22  of  the  judge's  decision  are
    identical to the reasons for refusal letter except that in a number  of
    places the pronouns are changed. For example  at  paragraph  9  of  the
    decision the third sentence reads "The Appellant's documents  have  not
    been viewed in isolation by me..."  whereas  at  paragraph  31  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter the Respondent says "Your documents have not
    been viewed in isolation...".  The following sentence in  the  decision
    states "I note that the Appellant has sent the documents  both  in  his
    native language and translated into English" whereas  paragraph  32  of
    the reasons for refusal letter states "It has been noted that you  have
    sent the documents both in your native  language  and  translated  into
    English".  These two sentences reflect the  type  of  changes  made  in
    parts of the decision, otherwise the decision reflects almost word  for
    word the reasons for refusal letter.

 7. Mr Blundell properly accepted that it is of course open to a  judge  to
    take the summary of the  asylum  claim  and  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter.  He also acknowledged the decision in the case  of  Gheisari  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA  Civ  1854.   Mr
    Tufan relied on that decision in particular paragraphs 14 and 16.

 8. In the case of Gheisari Lord Justice Sedley set out the  background  to
    the case including extracts from the Appellant's witness statement, the
    refusal letter and the decision of the Tribunal.  In particular it  was
    noted that the Adjudicator there said  "I  was,  like  the  Respondent,
    unable to accept his account of what happened when he came to have been
    arrested and I do not find that part of his story credible"  [5].   The
    Adjudicator also went on to say that he had been "unable to accept  the
    appellant's evidence as to what he claims was the  persecution  he  was
    subjected to in Iran prior to his departure.  His  evidence  lacks  the
    ring of truth".

 9. Lord Justice Sedley concluded at paragraph 14:

         "What in the end in my view and it is a view I have come  to  after
         much hesitation saves the adjudicator's decision from a  deficiency
         of reasons, which is Mr O'Donnell's ground of attack  upon  it,  is
         the single passage that I have quoted, ending:  'His evidence lacks
         the ring of truth.'   This,  I  am  prepared  on  consideration  to
         accept,  goes  beyond  simply  echoing  the  Secretary  of  State's
         incredulity.  It expresses, however laconically, the  Adjudicator's
         own evaluation of the veracity of the  account  that  he  has  been
         given.  That was his task. Although for much of this appeal  I  was
         of the view that he had failed to perform it, I am prepared in  the
         end to accept,  slender  though  it  is,  that  it  represents  his
         independent judgment on the critical matter upon which the issue of
         risk to the appellant hinged, namely whether  he  had  indeed  been
         arrested, ill-treated and liberated as he claimed.  The adjudicator
         had recorded the father's tragic history but in the absence of  any
         weight placed on it by the appellant's own  advocate,  he  was  not
         obliged to bring it explicitly back into  account  when  explaining
         his rejection of the appellant's story."

    Lord Justice Thomas agreed with the reasoning of  Lord  Justice  Sedley
    saying:

         "...When deciding whether a person is giving a truthful account,  a
         fact-finder must obviously proceed logically and carefully and  set
         out that process in his reasons.  It is important that this is  not
         seen as a mechanistic process; it  is  one  that  requires  careful
         thought on each occasion and careful formulation of reasons.  In  a
         case of this kind, the issue of  whether  someone  is  telling  the
         truth or not is at the heart of the  decision.  It  is  regrettable
         that the process of reasoning of this Adjudicator was not  properly
         addressed. I agree with my Lord, Sedley LJ, that if  the  principal
         ground on which it is contended that an account is  untrue  is  the
         inherent improbability of that account, it  is  necessary  for  the
         fact-finder  to  address  two  separate  questions  and  make   his
         reasoning clear in respect of each.  The  question  of  whether  an
         account which the fact-finder finds  is  inherently  improbable  is
         untrue is a separate question to the question as  to  the  inherent
         improbability, as  accounts  that  are  inherently  improbable  can
         nonetheless in certain cases be true.  It  is  therefore  important
         that that the separate question as to the truth of an account found
         to be inherently improbable is addressed  and  dealt  with  in  the
         reasons."[16]

    He too found that the reasoning in  that  case  was  "just  sufficient"
    [17].

10. It was not disputed by Mr Tufan that the only  opinions  given  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in  this  case  were  the  last  few  sentences  in
    paragraph 8 and the contents of paragraphs 23 to 26.

11. At paragraph 8 the judge considered letters submitted by the  Appellant
    said to have come from the Taliban and concluded;

         "These letters were conflicting; some said he must be punished  and
         others said he must join the Taliban to avenge  his  brother.  They
         made no sense.  Furthermore, no credible reason was given for  such
         laminated documents or why they should be undated."

12. At paragraph 23 the judge said;

         "I do not believe that the  Appellant  has  given  a  credible  and
         consistent account with regard to his fear of the  Taliban  and  in
         regard to the lack of support and protection he would receive  from
         the authorities on account of his broth (sic)"

    It is clear that this sentence and therefore  paragraph  is  unfinished
    and makes an assertion that the judge did  not  believe  the  Appellant
    without any further reasoning.

13. At paragraphs 24 and 25 the judge appears to deal with the  Appellant's
    witness statement and with his assertion therein  in  relation  to  the
    asylum interview.  The judge points out that, for the first time at the
    appeal, the Appellant tried to find fault in the interview record  when
    he had plenty of opportunity to do so before the  hearing.   The  judge
    says at paragraph 25 that  he  does  not  believe  the  timing  of  the
    Appellant's criticism of the interview record to be credible.  He  goes
    on to say that he does not believe that the Appellant was  targeted  by
    the Taliban or that he would be at risk upon return and  that  no  risk
    arises in Kabul.

14. Mr Tufan emphasised the fact that the Section 8  issue  raised  in  the
    reasons for refusal  letter  which  related  to  the  Appellant  having
    absconded for six years was a weighty factor on which  the  judge  made
    findings.  However, as noted in relation to the other apparent findings
    made by the judge, he considered Section 8 at paragraph  22,  where  he
    simply rehearsed the Secretary of  State's  reasoning  in  relation  to
    section 8 without acknowledgement and failed to make his own evaluation
    of Section 8.

15. Mr Tufan submitted the judge could not be criticised for adopting  some
    or all of the Secretary  of  State's  reasoning  as  he  was  basically
    considering the same evidence.  Whilst the judge was  considering  some
    of the same documentary evidence as that considered by the Secretary of
    State, he failed to make his own evaluation  in  relation  to  that  or
    failed to acknowledge that he was simply adopting with the Secretary of
    State's evaluation.

16. In my view the judge does not clearly acknowledge that paragraphs 2  to
    22 are (with the exception of a few sentences at the end of paragraph 8
    and the changes to some pronouns) taken from the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter.  Instead of acknowledging the  opinions  of  the  Secretary  of
    State and saying that he agreed with them the judge  appears  to  adopt
    the reasoning of the Secretary of  State  as  his  own  throughout  the
    decision.

17. This differs from the approach of the Adjudicator in Gheisari  who,  as
    acknowledged by Sedley LJ at paragraph 14, went beyond "simply  echoing
    the Secretary of State's incredulity"  and  carried  out  his  task  by
    expressing his "own evaluation of the veracity of the  account  he  had
    been given".

18. In the appeal before me the  judge  largely  echoed  the  Secretary  of
    State's assessment.  His own evaluation is limited to one aspect of the
    Appellant's  witness  statement  at  paragraphs  24  and  25  and   one
    assessment at  paragraph  8  in  relation  to  some  of  the  documents
    provided.  The Appellant submitted an  eleven  page  witness  statement
    dated 10th November 2016 and, apart from the Appellant's assertion that
    errors arose as  a  result  of  interpretation  issues  in  the  asylum
    interview, which he dealt with at  paragraphs  24  and  25,  the  judge
    failed to engage with any of the other  evidence  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant.  The judge failed to say whether or not the  Appellant  gave
    oral evidence and failed to make any assessment of his  oral  evidence.
    The judge failed to engage with the background evidence, in  particular
    the newspaper articles submitted by  the  Appellant,  which  he  claims
    relates to the death  of  his  brother  and  his  brother's  family  in
    September 2008.

19. In this case, unlike the  case  of  Gheisari,  the  judge  adopted  the
    reasons of the Secretary of  State  without  fully  acknowledging  that
    those were the Secretary of State's reasons. Moreover, the judge failed
    to engage and make his own  evaluation  in  relation  to  the  evidence
    before him.  Moreover, in my view, the findings made by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 8, 23, 24 and 25 have been infected by the adoption  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter without acknowledgement.

20. In conclusion, in reading the judge's decision as a whole, it is  clear
    that a very substantial part of the judge's decision  is  adopted  from
    the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  without  acknowledgement  thus  the
    conclusions in the reasons for refusal letter are presented as those of
    the judge.   This  is  not  sufficient  to  show  that  the  judge  has
    independently evaluated the evidence and the appeal.  The few sentences
    at the end of paragraph 8 along  with  paragraphs  23  to  25  are  not
    sufficient.  Those conclusions have been infected by  the  failures  in
    the remainder of the judge's decision in relation to his assessment  of
    the evidence in the context of the adoption of the reasons for  refusal
    letter.  In my view, these errors render the decision flawed  for  lack
    of clarity.

21. In these circumstances I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  As there are few independent  findings  of  fact  I  do  not
    preserve any of the findings in the judge's decision.

22. In the circumstances and in light of the substantial findings  of  fact
    to be made, I consider it appropriate to  remit  the  decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law.   I  set
that decision aside and remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
hearing afresh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date: 14 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable, therefore there can be no fee order.

Signed                              Date: 14 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
