
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11401/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13th May 2019                         |On 3rd June 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     HMK
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Masih (of Counsel), IMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E. M. M. Smith, promulgated on 28th February  2019,  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham on 20th February 2019.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Iraq,  and  was  born  on  29th
    September 2002.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 14th March 2018, refusing his  application  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he was born in the village
    of Abu Sabah.  From there he moved to live in Tuz  Khurmatu,  where  he
    lived until he left Iraq.  He  lived  with  his  parents,  his  younger
    sister and older brother.  He is a Sunni Muslim.  He is also of Kurdish
    ethnicity.  His father and brother were members of the  Peshmerga.   In
    October 2017 the Appellant claims that his father and brother left  for
    work but never returned back.  The following day members of  the  Hashd
    al-Shaabi attacked the Appellant's home and took  his  mother  away  as
    well.  The Appellant telephoned his uncle who  lived  in  Kirkuk.   The
    uncle arranged for the Appellant to leave Iraq.  The Appellant  arrived
    in the UK on 25th November 2017.  He had spent a month travelling.   He
    was a minor and therefore he was granted discretionary leave to remain.



The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge, having reviewed the evidence, concluded that  the  Appellant
    had no reason to fear return to his uncle's home in Kirkuk,  or  indeed
    to his parents' home, given that the judge  had  rejected  the  account
    given by the Appellant  that  both  his  parents  were  abducted.   The
    Appellant had explained in his SEF interview (questions 12 to  question
    16) that he knows that the CSID is a Teskara.  The judge observed  that
    from the answer given by the Appellant at question 13, "it  appears  he
    had one".  In those circumstances, "The appellant's uncle will be in  a
    position to assist him upon his return as he did when assisting him  to
    leave.  The uncle will be in a position  as  and  when  this  appellant
    returns to Iraq, which will not be until he is 18, to assist  him  ..."
    (paragraph 31).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state  that  in  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    appeal, the judge had referred to  questions  and  answers  within  the
    asylum interview, which have not been in the papers  before  him.   The
    judge had also stated that the Appellant had not taken issue  with  the
    Respondent's evaluation in the light of the Appellant's answers,  which
    was not true.  The judge had been concerned  that  the  record  of  the
    answers was  incomplete.   It  was  therefore  incumbent  upon  him  to
    consider adjourning the hearing.  Or, at the  very  least,  the  matter
    should have raised in court.  In  his  second  witness  statement,  the
    Appellant had actually taken issue with the Respondent's interpretation
    of his account.

 6. Second, the judge had  failed  to  assess  the  expert  evidence.   The
    expert's view was that the questions put to the Appellant had not  been
    formulated carefully enough to allow him to make a clear assessment  of
    his true  home  town.   The  judge  had  made  no  reference  to  this.
    Therefore, the judge could not use this as a basis to reject the claim.



 7. Third, the judge stated that the Appellant had no  reason  for  fearing
    return to his uncle's home in Kirkuk or his parents' home.  However, he
    had not considered whether Kirkuk remained in the contested area.

 8. Fourth, the judge failed to engage with  the  risks  of  the  Appellant
    being a lone, unattended minor.  The judge also had not looked  at  the
    imputed political opinion issue, given the family's membership  of  the
    Peshmerga, and the risks as a Sunni Muslim which  would  apply  to  the
    Appellant.

 9. On 5th April 2019 permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 10th May 2019, a Rule 24 response was filed by the  Respondent.   At
    the hearing before me on 13th May 2019, neither Ms Jones for  the  Home
    Office, nor Mrs Masih for the Appellant, had a copy of this.  I  handed
    up my own copy for them to read and to use during the course  of  their
    submissions.  The Rule 24 response makes it clear that the judge took a
    holistic approach to the evidence and observed that "whilst  there  are
    discrepancies or vagueness in his answers, I must  assess  his  account
    taking into account his evidence in the round"  (paragraph  28).   This
    showed that the judge was alive to all the issues.  Moreover, the judge
    had stated (at paragraph 27) that the Peshmerga and the Hashd al-Shaabi
    were in an alliance with a common enemy.  This being  so,  it  was  not
    credible that the fragile relationship between these two factions would
    be fractured by the abduction of the Appellant's father and brother and
    then the mother.  Finally, with respect to the expert report of Dr Alan
    George, the judge had given  anxious  scrutiny  to  this  evidence  (at
    paragraphs 25 to 29) and the challenge to their decision was  simply  a
    disagreement with the decision.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 13th May  2019.  Mrs  Masih,  appearing  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant,  relied  upon  the  detailed   grounds   of
    application, through which she took the Tribunal meticulously, as  well
    as placing a reliance on the skeleton argument, which  was  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   In  essence,  Mrs  Masih  had   the   following
    submissions.

12. First, that there was a procedural impropriety in the  judge  referring
    to missing  parts  of  the  SEF  interview  (at  paragraph  28  of  the
    decision),  but   failing   to   either   invite   comment   from   the
    representatives,  before  detailing  the  appeal,  or  adjourning   the
    hearing.  The fact was, submitted Mrs Masih, that she herself  had  the
    remaining questions, after question 40 of the SEF  interview.   A  full
    copy of the SEF interview was indeed placed in the  Appellant's  bundle
    itself (see pages 12 to 41).  Given that the judge had to give "anxious
    scrutiny" to the evidence, before rejecting that the Appellant was  not
    from Tuz Khurmatu, as the Appellant claimed, all the questions  had  to
    be looked at.  The relevant questions, were  in  any  event,  not  from
    question 40 of the refusal letter, but from paragraphs 32 to 35 of  the
    refusal letter.

13. Second, the judge had failed to consider the material evidence  and  to
    give adequate reasons,  when  observing  (at  paragraph  28)  that  the
    Appellant did not take issue with the Respondent's view of the  answers
    he had provided,  because  the  Appellant  had  done  exactly  that  at
    paragraphs 2 and paragraphs 5 to 8 of  his  second  statement   of  4th
    January 2019 (at the Appellant's bundle in pages  7  to  11).   He  had
    maintained there that he was from Tuz Khurmatu.  It was not open to the
    judge to reject the Appellant's account of the Appellant  having  grown
    up in Tuz Khurmatu (at paragraph 29).  Moreover, the judge had accepted
    Dr Alan George's report as credible (paragraph 25) and  yet  failed  to
    accept the Appellant's origins and the credibility of his claim.

14. Third, there was a failure to consider material evidence (at  paragraph
    27), because even if the Appellant was mistaken as to the  identity  of
    the perpetrators responsible for the disappearance of  his  father  and
    brother, the indiscriminate attacks  and  the  ethnic  tension  on  the
    grounds support the occurrence of such  events  and  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant from Hashd al-Shaabi, on account of  his  Kurdish  ethnicity,
    and his Sunni identity in Tuz Khurmatu (see paragraphs 126  to  130  of
    the expert report in the Appellant's bundle at pages 92 to 94, and  the
    Amnesty International Report in the Appellant's bundle at page 134).

15. Fourth, the judge materially misdirected himself in-law in  failing  to
    apply the country guidance here.  The judge observed (at paragraph  31)
    that the Appellant had no reason to fear returning to his uncle's  home
    in Kirkuk.  However,  this  overlooked  the  fact  that  Kirkuk  was  a
    contested area, and the judge failed to engage with the expert's report
    about the conditions on the ground there, and  also  misunderstood  the
    central importance that the CSID card plays  in  Iraq,  and  failed  to
    adequately assess the  Appellant's  ability  to  obtain  identification
    documents.

16. In any event, the Appellant was a member of a particular social  group,
    in that he was a lone unattended minor, who had lost contact  with  his
    family members.  Finally, all these errors made a  material  difference
    to the outcome of the appeal and this being so, this appeal  should  be
    allowed and the matter  should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with a gap of at least six weeks from  now,  to  enable  fresh
    evidence material to be obtained by those representing the Appellant

17. For her part, Ms Jones submitted that there was no error of law.   This
    is because the judge had fundamentally accepted the  Appellant  as  not
    being a witness of truth.  He had said that  his  problems  started  in
    October 2017.  This was not true.  There was no point in  relying  upon
    the expert report of Dr George in this regard,  because  he  had  quite
    properly made it clear that, "I should like to stress  that  I  make  a
    clear distinction between plausibility-whether an account could be true-
      and  credibility-whether  it   is"   (see   paragraph   26   of   the
    determination), and so credibility remained entirely a matter  for  the
    judge to determine here. This being so, one had to look at the eventual
    conclusion of Dr George.  When  addressing  the  question  whether  the
    Appellant  was  indeed  from  Tuz  Khurmatu  as  he  claimed,  and   in
    considering whether the Appellant had given sufficient answers  to  the
    evidence for an expert opinion to be formed on this, what Dr George had
    said was indicative.  He explained (paragraph 234 at  page  90  of  his
    report) that,

         "In my view the questions put to [the Appellant] by the Home Office
         concerning  his  origins  were  not  formulated   sufficiently   or
         carefully to permit any clear indication of his origins.  In  order
         for me to provide a clear opinion as to his likely origins I  would
         need to conduct an in depth investigation, including  an  interview
         with [the  Appellant].   I  have  discussed  this  with  his  legal
         representatives who advised that such an investigation  was  beyond
         the scope of my present report".

18. Given that, in the end, Dr George was unable to pinpoint  clearly  that
    the Appellant was indeed from Tuz Khurmatu, the judge was  entitled  to
    conclude in the manner that he did, after  having  looked  at  all  the
    evidence in its entirety.

19. In reply, Mrs Masih submitted that if it was the  case  that  the  Home
    Office had not formulated sufficiently carefully questions to be put to
    the Appellant (as stated by Dr George towards the end of his report  at
    paragraph 234), then  this  was  hardly  the  fault  of  the  Appellant
    himself.

No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

21. First, this is a case where the judge has found  the  Appellant  to  be
    lacking in credibility as a general matter.  In what  is  comprehensive
    determination, whereby the judge shows  mastery  of  the  facts  raised
    before him, he makes it clear that "there are two incidents  complained
    by the appellant as to why he fled Iraq", the first was his father  and
    brother and going to work and the  second  on  the  following  day  his
    mother was taken" (paragraph 21).  In looking at this  allegation,  the
    judge considers the screening interview, where the Appellant was  asked
    how he travelled to and entered the UK, and he  had  replied  "I  don't
    remember the exact date when I left Iraq but it took less than a  month
    to arrive here" (paragraph 22).

22. The Appellant then himself provided the dates of having  fled  Iraq  at
    the end of October, and having entered the UK  on  26th  November  2017
    (paragraph 22).  After this was done, the Presenting  Officer,  at  the
    hearing, put it to the Appellant that these dates could not be  correct
    bearing in mind that "he was fingerprinted in Greece at  the  beginning
    of September".

23. In reply the Appellant said that his culture does not give significance
    to dates.  When it was put to him that he had provided  the  dates  he,
    replied that he was then "very tired and in a bad condition" (paragraph
    22).  The judge's view of this part of the hearing was that  the  dates
    relied upon by the appellant were provided by him and confirmed by  him
    10 months later yet as soon as he was confronted with the fact that  he
    had been fingerprinted nearly  two  months  before  he  left  Iraq  the
    appellant's reply was that "he could not remember anything".

24. The judge went on to say that even if the Appellant's age was  factored
    in

         "he was untruthful in his witness statement and  in  his  screening
         interview.  The lie that he left in October or  November  2017  was
         repeated by him in the SEF interview.  I do not accept  that  dates
         are not significant in his culture, much because he is the one  who
         volunteered the dates." (Paragraph 24).

    There is no reason why the  judge's  conclusion  with  respect  to  the
    Appellant's credibility in this respect is flawed.  It is well-reasoned
    and it is based entirely on the facts before the Tribunal.

25. Second, the judge considers the report of Dr Alan George (paragraph 25)
    and makes it quite clear that "I will afford his report the appropriate
    weight".  He observes Dr George's report where he states that  "if  the
    Hashd al-Shaabi had targeted his father and brother it would  not  have
    been because they were in the Peshmerga", and the judge's view was that
    "I am satisfied that if they had disappeared  it  was  unlikely  to  be
    because they were in the Peshmerga" (paragraph 25).  This  too,  was  a
    conclusion open to the judge to make.

26. Third, the judge observed how the Peshmerga  and  the  Hashd  al-Shaabi
    were allies with a common enemy, and he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    fragile relationship between the two of them would be fractured by  the
    abduction of the Appellant's father and brother and  their  mother.  He
    observes that "Even if the appellant's father and brother were abducted
    it simply makes no sense to return and abduct the  appellant's  mother"
    (paragraph 27).  This  again,  was  a  finding  that  the  judge  could
    properly make on the evidence before him.

27. Fourth, that left the question of whether the Appellant came  from  Tuz
    Khurmatu as he alleged.   He  observed  that  the  refusal  letter  (at
    paragraph 40) had made no reference to the questions and answers within
    the SEF interview which were not within  the  papers  before  me.   Mrs
    Masih submits that this is a material error.  I find that even if it is
    an error it is not a material one.  It is true that the judge comes  to
    the conclusion that the second Appellant's witness  statement  did  not
    take issue with the Respondent's view of the answers provided, and  Mrs
    Masih contends that this cannot be right.  However, ultimately, if  the
    issue was that the Appellant was  from  Tuz  Khurmatu,  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the Appellant was not from this place for the
    reasons that he went on to give at paragraph 29.  These were  that  the
    Appellant had not provided  a  true  account  of  the  experiences  and
    reasons for claiming asylum.  The incidents that occurred in October or
    November 2017 could not be true given that he had been fingerprinted in
    Greece in September.  The judge was entitled to conclude  that  he  was
    satisfied "that the appellant's account  of  having  grown  up  in  Tuz
    Khurmatu is also not credible"  (paragraph  29).   This  is  not  least
    because Dr Alan George himself states  (at  paragraph  234)  that,  "in
    order for me to provide a clear opinion as  to  his  likely  origins  I
    would need to conduct an in depth investigation, including an interview
    ...", which he had not been able to do.

28. That left the question as to whether the Appellant could be returned to
    Iraq.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  state  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated a knowledge in his SEF interview of this year's ID,  which
    he described as a "Tescara" and that his answer to question  13  showed
    that "it appears he had one".  This being so, he could  return  to  his
    uncle's home in  Kirkuk  and  he  could  be  assisted  in  getting  the
    necessary documentation (paragraph 31).  These conclusions were open to
    the judge to come to.  There is,  in  short,  no  error  of  law.   The
    challenge amounts to a disagreement only.

Notice of Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law such that it falls to  be  set  aside.   The
    decision shall stand.

30. An anonymity order is made.

31. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th May 2019



