
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11207/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2019                  |On 11 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                              ashkan Javanmardi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, of Counsel instructed by Messrs JK
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Sweet who, in a determination promulgated on 29
    October 2018, dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State made on 9 September  2018  to  refuse  to  grant
    asylum.

2.     The appellant is a citizen of Iran  born  on  12  August  1991.   The
    basis of the his claim was that he is now a Christian, having converted
    to Christianity in Iran in December 2014 when he had been  invited  for
    Christmas celebrations at a friend's house and then   to a Bible  group
    session. He said that he had been baptised in Iran either  on  15  June
    2015 or between November and December 2014.  He had married in February
    2015 in an Islamic ceremony and had told his wife of his conversion  to
    Christianity.  His wife's uncle who worked for Sepah -  the  guards  of
    the Islamic  Revolution  -   and  when  he  had  found  out  about  the
    appellant's conversion he and the appellant's father-in-law came to the
    house and had beaten him severely, threatening to have him arrested for
    converting to Christianity.  He had left  Iran  in  December  2015  and
    claimed asylum in Austria on 11 January 2016. However, in July 2016 his
    wife convinced him to return to Iran.  When he had returned his  wife's
    uncle had begun visiting his home frequently and questioned  him  about
    his Christian friends.  The appellant found  that  his  wife  had  been
    texting her uncle about his Christian contacts and he said that he  had
    no longer felt safe and decided to leave Iran again.  He left again  in
    February 2017 and arrived here on 6 March 2017.

3.   The Secretary  of  State  considered  the  appellant's  claim  to  have
    converted to  Christianity  but  pointed  out  that  at  interview  the
    appellant could not remember the date on which he had been converted or
    had been baptised and that although he said that he had  been  studying
    the Bible for six or seven months he had been unable to state the  name
    of the church in Britain which he claimed he had been  attending  on  a
    weekly basis. It was not considered reasonable that he would be  unable
    to name his local place of worship.  Moreover, the appellant  had  been
    unable to tell the  interviewing  officer  the  story  of  Easter,  had
    incorrectly stated Jesus had ten disciples and was unable to state what
    day Christmas fell on saying that it was between November and  December
    or between December and January.   Moreover,  the  appellant  had  been
    unable to say which Testament of the Bible he had been following  as  a
    Protestant Christian.

4.    The  Secretary  of  State  noted  that   the   appellant   said   that
    approximately six months before he had married his wife he had begun to
    feel differently about Islam and that, given that his wife was a devout
    Muslim, there must be doubts about the credibility of his conversion to
    Christianity. Alternatively, the  appellant  had  contradicted  himself
    when he said that had stated that his wife was never a strict  follower
    of Islam.

5.   The letter of refusal pointed out that although his wife had  told  her
    mother and her uncle Ali, who worked for Sepah, about  the  appellant's
    Christianity and he had said Ali was one of the most  important  people
    in Sepah, the appellant did not know what rank he held.  Moreover,  the
    letter of refusal placed emphasis on the fact  that  despite  what  had
    happened to him in Iran the appellant had returned to Iran despite  his
    fear of beatings and of being arrested.

6.   In the determination the judge noted the  appellant's  evidence  and  a
    letter from the Reverend Mehr of the church which the appellant said he
    is currently attending.  The  appellant  had  said  that  he  had  been
    introduced to the church by his uncle and a friend but that  his  uncle
    was not at court to give evidence as he thought there would be too many
    witnesses.  The appellant was asked  why  had  only  started  attending
    Reverend Mehr's  church  in  2018  and  he  had  replied  that  he  had
    previously attended an English speaking church but  he  had  difficulty
    understanding the first church and so had moved to  an  Iranian  church
    because it was near to his girlfriend's house.  The appellant confirmed
    that he claimed asylum in Austria but had  left  without  awaiting  the
    outcome.  He was asked further questions about his marriage and it  was
    noted that his wife was still in Iran and that he had divorced  her  in
    2018.  The appellant said that he had been confused about the  date  of
    his baptism.

7.   The appellant's partner gave evidence, stating that they  had  attended
    St Mary's church together  but  that  the  appellant  now  attended  an
    Iranian church because she worked weekends and he cannot speak English.
    Because of the time of services it is possible for him to  go  to  both
    churches on a Sunday.  She indicated that she had  had  an  immigration
    appeal.

8.    In  paragraphs  47  onwards  the  judge  set  out  his  findings   and
    conclusions.  He stated there were  many  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    claim which cast doubt on his credibility.  Firstly, although the judge
    stated that while he accepted  there  may  have  been  difficulties  in
    translating from the Iranian calendar to the  Gregorian  calendar,  the
    appellant had given conflicting dates about the date of his  baptism  -
    whether in June 2015 or November/December 2014  and  indeed  about  the
    dates of his pre-baptism classes.   Moreover, the appellant had claimed
    to be attending St Mary's Church in north London and staying  with  his
    uncle but neither of his uncles who were both allegedly Christians  and
    had claimed asylum in Britain based on their Christianity had  attended
    court to give evidence.  Neither of their witness statements  mentioned
    Christianity but merely that they were supporting the  appellant.   The
    judge went on to refer to differences about  where  the  appellant  had
    attended church.  The judge concluded that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    genuine Christian but that even if he were he would not be at  risk  on
    return. He wrote that the appellant:

         "56.   ...would only face persecution by the  state  if  he  was  a
             Christian and  had  converted  to  Christianity  from  another
             religion and actually sought to  convert  others.   He  states
             that he has been attempting to convert others to  Christianity
             but has so far not achieved any converts.   According  to  the
             Country Information Policy Guidance dated March 2018 the level
             of discrimination faced by Christians born into  the  religion
             who are not actively evangelising is not sufficiently  serious
             in its nature and frequency as to  amount  to  persecution  or
             serious  harm.  They  would  attract  the  adverse  notice  of
             authorities on return to Iran and be at risk of persecution if
             they had practised evangelical  activities  and  would  do  so
             publicly.  This is not the case of the appellant  who,  if  he
             has been taking part in  Christian  activities,  has  done  so
             discreetly.  In respect of ordinary converts, that is  to  say
             those who are not active evangelisers there is a risk but  not
             a real risk of serious harm if returned to Iran.  He  will  be
             able to practise Christianity discreetly.  This conduct  would
             be consistent with the decision in HJ (Iran) [2000].

         57.  Furthermore, his failure to await the outcome  of  his  asylum
             application in Austria goes to his credibility under Section 8
             of the Asylum, Immigration and Asylum (Treatment of Claimants,
             etc) Act 2004."

    The judge noted the appellant was receiving counselling for his  mental
    health and had attempted suicide in 2017 when he was informed he  might
    be returned to Iran.  However, it had been confirmed that he was not  a
    suicide risk since then as he himself had stated in reply  to  question
    18.  The judge therefore dismissed the appeal.

9.   The grounds of appeal asserted firstly that the judge had erred in  his
    assessment of risk on return for an Iranian convert and by holding that
    only Christians who proselytised and had come to the attention  of  the
    authorities were at risk and  ordinary  converts  who  practised  their
    faith discreetly were not at risk.  The grounds  suggested  that  while
    the judge, following the determination in SZ  and  JM  (Christians,  FS
    confirmed)  Iran  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00082,  might  have  reached   his
    conclusions on the basis of applying HJ (Iran) [2008] UKIAT 00044, when
    he held that it was reasonably tolerable for Christian converts to have
    to hide their faith. This was clearly wrong as the  Supreme  Court  had
    held when overturning that determination.

10.  The grounds went on to state that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    relevant factors when in determining credibility by not  giving  weight
    to the danger to the appellant if the adverse conclusions  were  wrong.
    The judge had erred in making adverse credibility finding based on  the
    lack of documentary evidence of the appellant's baptism from Iran: such
    documents could not be sent.  The judge was effectively  implying  that
    corroboration was necessary which was incorrect when considering asylum
    jurisprudence.  They referred to the fact that the judge  had  accepted
    that the conversion of dates from the Iranian calendar to the Gregorian
    calendar could cause confusion.

11.  While the judge had accepted that the appellant attended church it  was
    stated that the judge had erred in concluding that  the  appellant  was
    not sincere in his beliefs.  The grounds referred to a judgment in  the
    Administrative Court by Judge Gilbert in SA (Iran) v SSHD  [2012]  EWHC
    2575 (Admin) which had stated that it was not appropriate for  a  judge
    to reach firm conclusions about a professed conversion when the convert
    had been raised in a different culture.

12.  Permission was granted by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-
    Hutchison who stated that it was arguable that  the judge had erred  in
    law in his assessment of risk on return for an Iranian convert  and  in
    holding that the decision in   SZ  and  JM  that  only  Christians  who
    proselytise and came to the attention (of the authorities) were at risk
    and that ordinary converts who  practised their faith  discreetly  were
    not at risk :  the appellant's evidence was  that  he  attended  church
    discreetly in Iran due to fear of persecution.  She considered that  it
    was arguable that the judge might also have  erred  in  making  adverse
    credibility findings in regard to the appellant's faith  because  there
    was no documentary evidence of his baptism from Iran and  by  accepting
    that dates could be confused because of the change in calendar.

13.  At the hearing before me Mr Jafar referred to  the  grounds  of  appeal
    and stated that the judge was wrong to consider the appellant would not
    be at real risk of persecution on return.  He stated that the judge had
    erred in his interpretation of the judgment in HJ (Iran)  -  the  issue
    was that if it were the case that the appellant  would  act  discreetly
    because of fear of persecution that in itself would mean that he  would
    be entitled to asylum. The judge therefore should have assessed whether
    or not the appellant would act discreetly.  Moreover,  he  stated  that
    the letter from Reverend Mehr was not challenged  and  that  the  judge
    should not have required corroboration of the date of the baptism.

14.    In reply, Mr Kotas stated that the judge was entitled  to  find  that
    the appellant  was  not  a  genuine  Christian.   He  referred  to  the
    conclusions in the Reasons for Refusal Letter and said that the matters
    such as the appellant's lack of knowledge of Easter  and  the  date  of
    Christmas indicated that his claim was not credible.  He  asked  me  to
    find there was no material error of law in  the  determination  and  to
    place weight on the fact the  appellant  had  returned  to  Iran  after
    claiming asylum in Austria.

15.  I consider there is no material error of law in  the  determination  of
    the Judge.  The reality is that he did assess the evidence and  reached
    a conclusion thereon - that the appellant was not credible - which  was
    fully open to him.  The various points made in the Reasons for  Refusal
    Letter are cogent - the fact that the appellant could not  explain  the
    meaning of Easter let alone the date of Christmas,  the  fact  that  he
    thought that there were only ten disciples and indeed the fact that  he
    returned to Iran  despite  having  left  Iran  and  claimed  asylum  in
    Austria, all indicate that his claim to be a Christian convert was  not
    credible.  Indeed, there is a lack of evidence relating to  his  wife's
    uncle whom he claimed was a senior member of the Sepah but  was  unable
    to set out his rank, let alone the lack of clear evidence  of  when  he
    was baptised.

16.  The judge having found the appellant was  not  credible  the  issue  of
    whether or not he  would  behave  discreetly  or  would  or  would  not
    proselytise on return is  irrelevant  as  if  he  were  not  a  genuine
    Christian convert he would not wish  to  do  so.   Therefore,  while  I
    consider that the judge may have erred by referring to the  decision of
    the Tribunal in  HJ (Iran) that is not material to the decision:  there
    was simply nothing to indicate that if the appellant were  a  Christian
    convert - and the judge was entitled to conclude that he is not  -   he
    would  not act discretely:  that is what he had done in  Iran and there
    was nothing to indicate that he had proselytised here, or would be able
    to do so given his lack of knowledge of Christianity.

17.    I note that it is  not  argued  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his
    consideration of the rights of the appellant under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

18.    For these reasons I find that there is no material error  of  law  in
    the determination of the Immigration Judge and I dismiss this appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed:  [pic]    Date: 1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
