
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11929/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 March 2019                     |On 25 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    [A N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Ryan for Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsey, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Welsh who in a Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  on  8
    January 2019 dismissed the  claim  of  the  Appellant,  a  national  of
    Afghanistan whose date of birth is recorded as 1 January  1978  against
    the refusal by the Secretary of State to recognise him as a  person  in
    need of international protection. This appeal comes before me with  the
    permission  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Murray.  She  has
    helpfully summarised the grounds in the grant of permission. That grant
    reads as follows:

         "1   [...]

         2.   The grounds assert that the  Judge  erred  in  placing  little
         weight on the expert report of Dr Buttan  relying  too  heavily  on
         credibility issues and the lack of corroborative  evidence.  It  is
         submitted that the opinion of an experienced psychiatrist  that  he
         was not feigning symptoms has not been afforded appropriate  weight
         and is insufficiently reasoned. It is further  submitted  that  the
         Judge erred in failing to take the particular circumstances of  the
         Appellant into account in relation to internal flight and failed to
         address the Appellant's argument  that  the  case  of  AK  (Article
         15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 is no longer good law and  to
         have regard to the argument that the "sliding  scale"  approach  in
         relation to Article 15(c) applied in relation  to  the  Appellant's
         vulnerabilities.

         3.   It is arguable that  the  Judge  failed  to  give  appropriate
         weight to Dr Buttan's report as independent evidence.  It  is  less
         arguable that the findings, in the alternative, that the  Appellant
         could relocate are flawed for the reasons argued  in  the  grounds.
         The Judge clearly addressed the Appellant's arguments and  evidence
         in relation to departing from AK at paragraph 47 but  arguably  did
         not address the "sliding scale" argument".

 2. This appeal has something of a history. On 23 December  2014  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal S J  Clark  heard  the  Appellant's  appeal  in
    respect of an earlier refusal by the Secretary of  State  to  recognise
    him, the Appellant as a refugee. At paragraph 2  of  his  Decision  and
    Reasons Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Welsh has commendably  briefly
    summarised the Appellant's claim. He fears persecution  by  members  of
    the Ahmad Shah Masood Party and the Taliban. It was his case  that  his
    uncle was an active member of the Party but then left  and  joined  the
    Taliban. Members of the Party believed that the Appellant's  uncle  had
    stolen weapons from them. The consequence was that  the  Appellant  was
    threatened. His brother was murdered. It was also the Appellant's  case
    in the appeal brought before Judge Welsh that the current situation  in
    Afghanistan was such that his return would breach Article 15(c) of  the
    Qualification Directive.

 3. This is a case in  respect  of  which  the  guidance  in  the  case  of
    Devaseelan (Second Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri
    Lanka* [2002] UKIAT 00702 applies so that the starting point for  Judge
    Welsh was the findings made by Judge Clark in the earlier appeal  heard
    at Taylor House on 23 December 2014. Judge Clark dismissed  the  appeal
    on all grounds. There was an application for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal but that was refused. This matter came again  before
    the Tribunal after a fresh claim was made on behalf of the Appellant to
    the Secretary of State which was originally rejected  but  subsequently
    accepted as such following Judicial Review proceedings.

 4. Looking at paragraph 19 of the decision of Judge Clark it is clear that
    he did not accept  any  material  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  claim,
    describing the account provided by the  Appellant  as  being  "full  of
    inconsistencies" the reason for those  inconsistencies  were  found  by
    Judge Clark to be because the account "was not true".

 5. In those circumstances although as I have said the starting  point  for
    Judge Welsh was the findings of Judge  Clark,  apart  from  nationality
    which was not in dispute there was very little for Judge Welsh to build
    upon.

 6. The guidance in the case of Devaseelan reads as follows:

         "In our view the second Adjudicator should treat  such  matters  in
         the following way:

               1. The first Adjudicator's determination should always be the
                  starting point. It is the authoritative assessment of  the
                  Appellant's status at the time it was made.  In  principal
                  issues  such  as  whether  the  Appellant   was   properly
                  represented, or whether he gave evidence,  are  irrelevant
                  to this.

               2.   Facts   happening   since   the   first    Adjudicator's
                  determination can always be  taken  into  account  by  the
                  second  Adjudicator.  If  those  facts  lead  the   second
                  Adjudicator to the conclusion that, at  the  date  of  his
                  determination  and  on  the  material  before   him,   the
                  Appellant makes his case, so be it. The previous decision,
                  on the material before the first Adjudicator and  at  that
                  date, is not inconsistent.

               3.   Facts   happening   before   the   first   Adjudicator's
                  determination and having no relevance to the issues before
                  him can  always  be  taken  into  account  by  the  second
                  Adjudicator. The first  Adjudicator  will  not  have  been
                  concerned with such facts, and his determination is not an
                  assessment of them."

 7. Miss Ryan prepared a helpful skeleton argument.  The  first  submission
    was that the Upper Tribunal should treat the grant of permission  as  a
    grant on all grounds. No point was taken on this in the Rule 24  Notice
    by the Secretary of State and accordingly given  the  guidance  in  the
    case of Ferrer (Limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304, I have
    addressed this appeal on the basis that all grounds are before me.  The
    grounds focus on the expert evidence of Dr Buttan  and  the  fact  that
    little weight was given to it; that the issue  of  internal  relocation
    had  not  properly  been  addressed,  though  the  issue  of   internal
    relocation does not arise if the Appellant is not in the first instance
    found to be a refugee. Further as I have already  mentioned  issue  was
    taken of the  Judge's  approach  to  humanitarian  protection  and  the
    sliding scale having regard to the guidance in  the  case  of  Elgafaji
    (Justice and Home Affairs) [2009] EUECJ C-465/07 (17 February 2009).

 8. I have looked with care at the skeleton argument provided by Miss Ryan.
    Judge Welsh quite properly began by consideration of  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark. Judge Welsh noted the basis upon which
    the Appellant was found not credible. He noted that the  Appellant  had
    given evidence before him that gave a  broadly  consistent  account  to
    that given to Judge Clark and noted further that the reality  was  that
    only additional material provided by the Appellant in  support  of  the
    fresh claim was medical evidence.

 9. Emphasis is placed upon the report of Dr Buttan. Judge Welsh looked  at
    the report of Dr Buttan and considered it from paragraph 21 through  to
    paragraph 25 of the Decision and Reasons.

10. Judge Welsh found the Appellant's case to lack credibility and said  so
    at paragraph 37. He also made clear at paragraph 38 that he had  looked
    at the evidence as a whole "to allow for the possibility that it  casts
    a different light upon the evidence that was given for Judge Clark".

11. Judge Welsh acknowledged  that  the  evidence  of  Dr  Buttan  provided
    additional support to  the  Appellant's  credibility  but  gave  little
    weight to it and gave as his reasons the following:

         "1.  The assessment relies upon the account given by the  Appellant
         and, for all the reasons set out in this judgment, I take the  view
         he is not a credible witness.

         2.   There is no independent corroboration of symptoms. Miss J, who
         was not called to give evidence, stated no more than,  "He  suffers
         with bouts of depression  which  can  make  it  very  difficult  to
         function well". That he meets a psychiatric on a  voluntary  basis,
         takes medication in addition. The Appellant has lived with  Miss  J
         since 2009. She described him as a friend and has in the past  been
         more than that; they were previously in a romantic relationship  in
         2010 to 2013. If anybody could give a detailed description  of  the
         Appellant's symptoms from 2009 to the present day, it is Miss J and
         yet she does not do so.

         3.   I also question how reliable what little evidence Miss J gives
         these. In the same letter, she stated the Appellant, "has very  few
         friends and does not social much away from the house because of the
         injury he has to his left leg". This  contradicts  the  Appellant's
         own account which statement 1, in which he stated that he has  lots
         of friends in the UK with whom he regularly socialises.

         4.   As Ms Ayodele pointed out to me in her submissions, his  first
         reports of depression and  insomnia  (April  and  May  2015)  occur
         shortly  after  he  has  been  refused  permission  to  appeal  the
         dismissal of his asylum appeal and also the ending of contact  with
         his wife and children. Both these events could be  genuine  sources
         of mental health difficulties.

         5.    Those first reports of depression and insomnia in mid-2015 do
         not correlate with his claim to have suffered those symptoms  since
         2005-2006 (as he claimed to Buttan). I note that the oral evidence,
         he stated that his father-in-law had prevented him  contacting  the
         family because of the  Appellant's  mental  health  problem,  which
         would date those mental  health  difficulties  occurring  in  2015.
         However, I do not accept that account:

             (i)  when asked, he was unable to give an explanation why  his
                  father-in-law would know  he  was  suffering  from  mental
                  health problems; and

             (ii)     this account is inconsistent  with  what  he  told  a
                  therapist on 10 January 2018 (when he had  the  assistance
                  of  an  interpreter).  His  therapist  recorded  that  the
                  Appellant explained his father-in-law had stopped his wife
                  from contacting him "because [his father-in-law] says [the
                  Appellant] has lived here for too long".

12. I have read the report  of  Dr  Buttan  and  looked  carefully  at  the
    skeleton argument of Ms Ryan.  I  am  also  grateful  to  her  for  the
    submissions which she made to  me  but  I  find,  and  indeed  have  no
    difficulty finding, that the findings made by Judge Welsh were findings
    that were open to him.

13. This is not a case in which insufficient weight was given to the report
    of Dr Buttan but in my view is a case in which the Appellant  disagrees
    with the findings that were open  to  the  Judge.  Judge  Welsh  in  my
    judgment carefully considered the evidence of Dr Buttan. He  recognised
    that  the  medical  evidence  provided  additional   support   to   the
    Appellant's credibility. This is not a case  in  which  the  judge  has
    fallen short of the guidance given in Mibanga v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    367. Judge Welsh made findings and then tested those  findings  against
    the medical evidence. However, and importantly, it is clear that  Judge
    Welsh considered all the evidence in the round and said so. It is to be
    remember that a judge has to start somewhere in their deliberations.

14. Having found that the Appellant had not  established  his  case,  Judge
    Welsh was right to find, as he did at paragraph 42 that  the  issue  of
    internal relocation did not arise. However, in the following paragraphs
    Judge Welsh  gives  cogent  additional  reasons  for  not  finding  the
    Appellant, overall to be a reliable witness.

15. Having regard to Article 15(c), the credibility  finding  made  against
    the Appellant was such that in my judgment the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    this point gets nowhere. It was not accepted that the Appellant did not
    have family and support in Kabul. That necessarily follows  because  it
    was for the Appellant to prove his case, albeit to the lower  standard,
    but having been found to be a witness so lacking in credibility  as  he
    was,  it  would  have  verged  on  perverse  to  have  found  that  the
    Appellant's evidence on this point was to be accepted. As it  is  there
    is reference to the Appellant having a cousin in Kabul  and  an  uncle,
    whom Judge Welsh clearly did not  accept,  as  was  open  to  him,  had
    disappeared as the Appellant had claimed.

16.  As to the submission made that Judge Welsh should have  accepted  more
    up-to-date background material, the Judge dealt  with  that  in  a  way
    which was again open to him, explaining why took the view  he  did  and
    again, in my judgment the Judge was entitled to take  that  view.  This
    finding should not take the Appellant by surprise given  the  terms  in
    which permission to appeal were given.

17. Where a Judge makes findings of fact which were open  to  him  then  no
    appeal lies, it is only if those findings  are  not  supported  by  the
    evidence  or  perverse  or  irrational  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  can
    interfere with them. In this case the appeal the Appellant has not made
    out his case on any of the grounds and accordingly the  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 17 April 2019






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker







