
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11026/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 July 2017                      | On 4 August 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                medhanie [t]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer of Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Peter Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on  [~]  1984.   He  appeals
    the decision of a First-tier Judge who dismissed his appeal against the
    decision of the respondent to  refuse  his  asylum  application  on  24
    September 2016.  The appellant's  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Judge on 10 November 2016.

2.   In brief the appellant's claim was based on his fear that  if  he  were
    returned to Eritrea he would face mistreatment due to draft evasion and
    illegal exit from Eritrea.

3.   The appellant applied for asylum after arrival in the  UK  on  29  June
    2009 but this claim was later withdrawn on 8 July 2011 as the appellant
    had  absconded.   He  made  an  unsuccessful  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card and made further submissions on 23 July 2014 giving rise
    to the refusal of his asylum claim in September 2016,  the  subject  of
    the appeal proceedings herein.

4.   In paragraph 7 of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  judge
    records the appellant's claim that he had been arrested from  his  home
    and taken to a military training camp from which he managed  to  escape
    with a friend.  He went to Sudan where  he  was  captured  by  Sudanese
    soldiers and was held captive for one week.  He then managed  to  leave
    Sudan and travel to Libya before  arranging  for  his  journey  to  the
    United Kingdom.

5.   Before the First-tier Judge  the  Presenting  Officer  applied  for  an
    adjournment in order to provide supplementary reasons to accompany  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter.  His application  was  opposed  by  Counsel
    then representing the appellant who referred to MST (National Service -
    risk category) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT.

6.   The findings of the judge on the  material  before  him  are  extremely
    difficult to interpret given the  number  of  typographical  and  other
    errors that feature in the decision.  Having found that the appellant's
    case would not lead him to be perceived as carrying out a political act
    in paragraph 45 of the decision the determination continues as follows:

         "46. I therefore make a finding that the appellant has not provided
             sufficient evidence even on the lower standard of  proof  that
             to show at that he would be imprisoned and that he would  face
             a prolonged period of detention and all at is unlikely  to  be
             subjected to serious  harm.   The  appellant's  representative
             referred me at two the case of MST and others and  I  have  at
             taken the findings of the tribunal in at  this  case  into  at
             consideration in my decision and reasons.  It  was  stated  in
             MST that it  remains  the  case  that  subject  to  3  limited
             exceptions that if a person of or approaching draft  age  will
             be at perceived on return as a draft evader  or  deserter  and
             that he or she will face a real risk of  persecution,  serious
             harm or ill-treatment contrary to article 3 or 4 of the ECHR.


             The case of the appellant at is that he does not  come  within
             any of the three exceptions listed in MST and would  therefore
             be  at  risk  as  a  draft  evader  having  left  the  country
             illegally.  The evidence of the  appellant  is  that  he  left
             Eritrea on 8 July 2007.  In MO Somalia (illegal exit - risk on
             return) Eritrea CG 2011 UKUT they referred to  MA  Somalia  at
             paragraph 33 it was indicated by the tribunal and that the key
             period in relation to that when people left Somalia  is  after
             August/September 2008, this date is seen as the turning  point
             because according to the  tribunal  in  MA  Somalia  there  is
             credible evidence indicating that this was the point  in  time
             when the Eritrea authorities, angered by the growing number of
             cases of persons who had been granted exit visas who had  then
             failed to return, decided to put your foot down by  suspending
             exit visa  facilities.   I  also  note  the  comments  of  the
             tribunal in MST where it was stated: "It continues to  be  the
             case (as in MO) that most  Eritreans  who  have  left  Eritrea
             since 1991 have done so illegally.  However, since  there  are
             viable,  albeit  still  limited,  categories  of  lawful  exit
             especially for those of draft age for  national  service,  the
             position remains as it was in MO, namely that a  person  whose
             asylum claim has not been found credible cannot be assumed  to
             have left illegally.  The position  also  remains  nonetheless
             (as in MO) that if such a person is found to have left Eritrea
             on or after August/September 2008, it may be  that  inferences
             can be drawn from their health history or level  of  education
             or their skills profile as to whether legal exit on their part
             was feasible, provided that such inferences can  be  drawn  in
             the light of adverse credibility findings.  For these purposes
             a lengthy period performing  national  service  is  likely  to
             enhance a person's skill profile.  It remains the case (as  in
             MO) that failed asylum seekers as such  are  not  at  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm on return".


         47.  I am not persuaded on the evidence that the  appellant  exited
             on the information before me, he left Eritrea  in  2007  which
             was before the clampdown in granting of exit  visas.   On  the
             facts the appellant travelled through several countries before
             he finally arrived in the United Kingdom and on his arrival he
             did make an asylum claim  but  he  subsequently  withdrew  his
             application and that he pursued settled status through another
             route.  I have taken this into account  in  making  a  finding
             that the appellant claim that to  be  a  draft  evader  and  a
             person who exited Eritrea illegally is without  merit  due  to
             his conduct and immigration profile/history."


7.   The judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  left  Eritrea
    illegally, would not be obliged to pay  a  diaspora  tax  and  (perhaps
    curiously) would  be  able  to  relocate  on  his  return.   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

8.   There was an application for  permission  to  appeal.   Permission  was
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal.  The application  was  renewed  and
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 14 June 2017.
     It was arguable that the judge had  not  explained  properly  why  the
    appellant was not one of the small identified categories of people from
    Eritrea who was likely to be a refugee and had not  gone  further  than
    making a general adverse credibility finding which was  not  sufficient
    to determine the appeal lawfully.  There  was  a  mass  of  "irritating
    typographical errors" and it was debateable whether these constituted a
    material error of law but all grounds could be argued.

9.   On 30 June 2017 a response was filed under Rule 24.   Rather  unusually
    the  respondent  did  not  oppose  the  appellant's   application   for
    permission to appeal and referred to the matter being remitted de  novo
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  At the hearing Mr Palmer  agreed  that
    this was the position of the respondent in  this  case.   Both  parties
    accordingly requested me to remit the appeal for  a  fresh  hearing  de
    novo before a different First-tier Judge.

10.  There had been no findings of fact on the details  of  the  appellant's
    case and no explicit reasons had been given.  The judge had not engaged
    with the details of the appellant's case - his military service and his
    escape for example.  The determination was insufficiently reasoned.

11.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  As  Judge
    Perkins said, the fact  that  a  determination  contains  typographical
    errors does not mean that it  is  materially  flawed  in  law.   It  is
    difficult however in this case to  reconcile  the  incoherence  of  the
    decision with the duty to give anxious  scrutiny  to  a  case  of  this
    nature.  The extract  above  illustrates  some  of  the  problems  with
    interpreting the decision - for example the reference to "The  case  of
    the appellant ... that he  does  not  come  within  any  of  the  three
    exceptions listed in MST" should clearly be a reference to the case for
    the respondent.  The first sentence of paragraph  47  is  not  easy  to
    construe either.

12.  In essence the way in  which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  put  the
    complaint  appears  best   to   encapsulate   the   position   of   the
    representatives before me - the general adverse credibility finding was
    not sufficient to determine the appeal lawfully.  Neither side seeks to
    support the decision in this case.  I accept that the factual  analysis
    and reasoning is flawed.  I agree that the matter must be remitted  for
    a fresh hearing.

    Decision

13.  The appeal is allowed  and  remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing  before  a
    different First-tier Judge.

    ANONYMITY ORDER

14.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

    FEE AWARD

15.  The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 3 August 2017

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


