
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11530/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House, London        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 18 January 2019                  |On: 30 January 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                           MR MOHAMMED BELAL UDDIN
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright   (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay     (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal") which  it  made  on  31  October  2018;
whereupon it dismissed the claimant's appeal from the Secretary  of  State's
decision  of  17  September  2018  refusing  to  grant   him   international
protection.

2.    I have not made an anonymity direction in  this  case.   The  tribunal
did not do so, I was not urged to do so, and  I  could  think  of  any  good
reason to do so.

3.    Shorn of all but essential detail, the  background  circumstances  are
as follows: The claimant is a national of Bangladesh and he was born  on  12
November 1992. He entered the United Kingdom ("UK") on 18 February 2015.  On
16  March  2018  he  claimed  asylum.  As  to  the   claimed   circumstances
underpinning that claim, he asserted that due to  previous  activity  for  a
student oppositionist group he would be  persecuted,  upon  return,  by  the
members of the ruling political party in Bangladesh, the Awami League.   The
Secretary of State,  however,  did  not  think  the  claimant  had  given  a
truthful or accurate account of events in  Bangladesh  and  concluded  that,
accordingly, he was not a refugee and could, therefore, safely return or  be
returned to Bangladesh.

4.    The  appeal  came  before  the  tribunal  on  30  October  2018.   The
claimant, although he had had some legal representation  in  the  past,  was
unrepresented before the tribunal.  The Secretary of State  was  represented
by a Home Office Presenting Officer.   It  is  necessary  to  say  something
about how the claimant came to be unrepresented at that stage.

5.    The relevant history of adjournment  requests  prior  to  the  hearing
before the tribunal is set out in some  detail  in  the  tribunal's  written
reasons of 31 October 2018.  I have in mind, in  particular,  what  is  said
from paragraphs 8 to 12 of  those  written  reasons.   But  put  simply  and
briefly, there had been a papers based  pre-hearing  review  on  16  October
2018.  At that point  the  tribunal  directed  the  claimant  to  provide  a
witness statement and a paginated bundle of documents he  proposed  to  rely
upon.  On 25 October 2018 the tribunal received a letter from  the  claimant
seeking a three month adjournment  of  the  proceedings  so  that  he  could
obtain documentary evidence from Bangladesh.  The application,  as  I  think
is normal practice these days, was considered not by a  Tribunal  Judge  but
by  a  "designated  caseworker"  who  refused  it  on  the  basis  that   no
explanation had been given as to the potential  relevance  of  the  document
and that there had, in any event, been plenty of time to obtain them in  the
past.   On  26  October  2018  the  tribunal  received  a  letter  from  the
claimant's solicitors seeking an adjournment on the basis that the  claimant
was unwell and would not be fit to attend the hearing.  The application  was
supported by a letter written by the claimant's general practitioner.   That
letter was dated 25 October 2018.  It made reference to the claimant  having
been suffering from a variety  of  symptoms  over  the  previous  two  month
period including generalised aches and pains and urinary frequency.  The  GP
also said that she had "strongly advised"  the  claimant  to  self-refer  to
local mental health services.  The  letter  did  not  directly  address  the
question of whether the claimant might or might  not  be  fit  to  attend  a
hearing.  That application was  refused  by  the  tribunal  because  of  the
absence of an indication in the GP's letter as  to  unfitness.   The  upshot
was that the claimant,  as  already  stated,  attended  unrepresented.   The
tribunal noted that he had explained to it that he had been unable  to  fund
representation and due to his health difficulties "had been  unable  to  see
his solicitor".

6.    It  is  clear  that  the  claimant  renewed  his  application  for  an
adjournment  in  person.   The  tribunal  said  this  about   that   renewed
application:

    "12.   ... the appellant renewed his  application  for  an  adjournment
         saying he needed more time to  obtain  documents  from  Bangladesh,
         raise funds in order to pay for representation and because  he  was
         not feeling  well.   The  respondent  opposed  the  application  to
         adjourn pointing out that the appellant had already had  plenty  of
         time to obtain documents from Bangladesh, his ability to fund legal
         representation was unlikely to change and that there were  no  good
         reasons for not proceeding with the appeal immediately.   Enquiries
         were made of the appellant's solicitors and in response at 10:53 am
         a letter was faxed to the tribunal in which they  stated  that,  on
         account  of  the  appellant's  illness  and  non-service   of   the
         respondent bundle they had not been able to prepare an  appellant's
         bundle.  They also stated that they had no  confirmed  instructions
         regarding representation  at  the  hearing  and  so  would  not  be
         attending."


And then, with respect to its  decision  on  the  adjournment  request,  the
      tribunal said this:

    "13.   In resolving the appellant's application for  an  adjournment  I
         considered   the   Tribunal   Procedure    (First-tier    Tribunal)
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.   I  paid  particular
         regard to rule 2 and the tribunal's overriding objective of dealing
         with cases fairly  and  justly  including  rule  2(2)(e):  avoiding
         delays so far  as  compatible  with  proper  consideration  of  the
         issues.  I  also  applied  the  principles  set  out  in:   Nwaigwe
         (Adjournment: fairness) (2014) UKUT 00418 (IAC) in particular  that
         the central issue was  fairness  and  ensuring  that  both  parties
         receive a fair hearing.


    14.    The appellant's request for an adjournment had three  bases  (i)
         to obtain documents  from  Bangladesh,  (ii)  the  appellant's  ill
         health, (iii) to be legally represented.  The first two  bases  had
         already been considered prior to the hearing and refused.  For  the
         reasons which had been expressed in refusing those  applications  I
         also considered that an adjournment was not  in  the  interests  of
         justice and would not assist  in  ensuring  a  fair  hearing.   The
         appellant still  could  not  identify  the  specific  documents  in
         Bangladesh which he was seeking, he made his asylum claim in  March
         2018 and so had already had seven months in  order  to  obtain  the
         documents and had in fact already obtained a number of documents in
         support of his claim.   The  appellant's  ill  health  was  not  so
         serious that it prevented him  from  attending  the  hearing.   The
         symptoms described in the GPs letter are  the  same  as  those  the
         appellant complained of in his screening interview  in  March  2008
         namely, headaches and back pain and so I considered that there  was
         no likelihood of the situation improving within a  reasonable  time
         in the future.  I also considered  that  the  appellant's  headache
         would not prevent him  from  fully  participating  in  the  hearing
         especially since the tribunal is  informal  and  flexible  and  the
         appellant could be given time to ensure he could fully participate.
          In relation to the third basis of the application the  appellant's
         solicitors had not attended stating they  did  not  have  confirmed
         instructions on whether they should attend from the appellant.  The
         appellant himself said he could not afford  representation  due  to
         his dire financial situation.  In these circumstances I  determined
         that an adjournment would not serve any purpose as the position  in
         the future would be exactly the same as it was on the  day  of  the
         hearing.   Finally  I  took  into  account  the   fact   that   the
         respondent's bundle had been properly served in accordance with the
         tribunal's directions and that it included a witness statement from
         the appellant plus the documents he submitted  in  support  of  his
         claim.  I was satisfied therefore that the information relevant  to
         the claim was before me.  In all the  circumstances  I  found  that
         dealing  with  the  appellant's  case  fairly  and   justly   meant
         proceeding  with  the  appeal  and  accordingly   I   refused   his
         application to adjourn.  I made it clear to the appellant  that  he
         would be assisted in presenting his case and that he would be given
         as much time as he needed on the day  to  ensure  he  could  do  so
         effectively."


7.    The tribunal then went  on  to  conduct  its  own  assessment  of  the
claimant's account of events and to comprehensively disbelieve him.  So,  it
dismissed his appeal.

8.    That was not the end of the matter because the claimant, who had  once
again been able to obtain representation on the basis, I am told,  of  funds
given to him by friends, sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
 The written grounds  are  surprisingly  extensive,  running  to  10  pages,
despite the fact that they only challenge the  way  in  which  the  tribunal
dealt with the adjournment request.  They make reference to the  quite  well
known decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:  Fairness)
[2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and to an old version of  the  First-tier  Tribunals
Rules of Procedure.  Permission to  appeal  was  granted  and  the  granting
Judge relevantly said this:

    "It is arguable that the refusal of the application to adjourn deprived
    the appellant of a fair hearing (Nwaigwe (Adjournment: Fairness) [2014]
    UKUT  00418  (IAC)).   The  grounds  raise  arguable  errors  of   law.
    Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds."


9.    Permission having been granted the  case  was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could  be  decided  whether
the tribunal had erred in law and, if it had, what should  flow  from  that.
Representation at that hearing was as stated above  and  I  am  grateful  to
both representatives for their clear and straightforward approach.

10.   Mr Plowright did not attempt to take me through all  of  the  grounds.
Instead he sensibly and appropriately focused upon what  was  likely  to  be
relevant.  He argued that in refusing the adjournment request  the  tribunal
had focused too much upon avoiding delays in the proceedings (see  paragraph
13 of its written reasons) rather than on fairness.  Whilst it had said,  in
the same paragraph, that "the central issue was fairness" that  really  only
amounted to its paying "lip-service" to fairness.  Whilst  the  GP's  letter
had been quite non-specific it did  demonstrate  ongoing  concerns  and  the
tribunal had not fully taken its content into account.  The  fact  that  the
claimant had turned up for the hearing should not be  held  against  him  in
the context of the claimed health  issues,  because  it  was  understandable
that an asylum seeker, even if not fit  to  attend,  might  make  determined
efforts.  It was not entirely clear whether the lack of funds was the  cause
of the failure to submit an appellant's bundle  of  documents  but,  in  any
event, the lack of written preparation was concerning.  As to  the  lack  of
funds in order to pay for representation, the tribunal should have  enquired
of the claimant as to what the position was  or  might  be  in  the  future.
Public  funding  is  difficult  to  secure.   Although  this  was  not   "an
outrageous refusal" to adjourn it had in the circumstances, been  an  unfair
one.

11.   Mr Lindsay, for the Secretary of State, confirmed that the  claimant's
appeal was resisted.  The tribunal had no reason to  think,  notwithstanding
the subsequent ability of the claimant to pay for representation in  seeking
to challenge the tribunal's decision, that  the  claimant  would  have  been
able to fund representation had it  adjourned  and  reconvened  on  a  later
date.  It was for the claimant to satisfy the tribunal that there  would  be
a prospect of securing funds and  therefore  being  represented  in  future.
Whatever  view  one  might  take  with  hindsight  the  tribunal  cannot  be
criticised for failing to predict the  future.   The  tribunal  had  clearly
reminded itself of  the  importance  of  fairness  in  deciding  whether  to
adjourn.  As to delay in the  proceedings  it  had  been  entitled,  perhaps
obliged, to take that into account as a result of the  overriding  objective
as contained in rule 2 of its Rules of Procedure.  As  to  unfitness,  there
was no clear evidence that the claimant was unfit to attend a hearing.

12.   In light of what had been said about the funding issue I read  to  the
representatives this passage from the tribunal's Record of Proceedings:

    "I ask for the adjournment I have asked friends to help me  with  money
    and in the future I will arrange a barrister to represent me."


13.   That is clearly a  record  of  what  the  claimant  had  said  to  the
tribunal in support of that aspect  of  his  adjournment  request.   Neither
representative had anything of real significance to add  to  what  they  had
already said but Mr Plowright did  argue  that  that  passage  afforded  his
argument some support in that it showed the claimant  had  raised  with  the
tribunal the fact that  he  might  be  able  to  obtain  future  funds  and,
therefore, might be represented at a reconvened hearing if there was  to  be
one.

14.   I reserved my decision as to error of law and afforded myself time  to
consider matters.  Having done that I have  decided  that  the  grounds,  as
clarified and amplified during the course of the hearing before me,  do  not
show that the tribunal erred in  law.   I  shall  now  explain  why  I  have
reached that view.

15.   The claimant had asked for a postponement and then an  adjournment  in
part  because  he  wanted  to  obtain  further  documentary  evidence   from
Bangladesh. But I  cannot  find,  in  the  material  in  front  of  me,  any
indication as to what those document are or how they might be of  relevance.
 It is clear that that information  had  not  been  given  to  the  tribunal
either.  It was for the claimant to demonstrate that fairness demanded  that
he be given an adjournment.  It was simply not possible for the tribunal  to
consider that it did, on the basis of the documents, without any  meaningful
information as to the content and potential relevance of them.

16.   As to the health concerns, I do not accept the contention made  to  me
at the hearing that the tribunal had not fully considered  the  GP's  letter
or had fully not taken it into account.  The letter is  a  relatively  brief
document.   What  the  tribunal  had  to  say  about  it  at  paragraph 11
demonstrates that it had  read  it  and  had  considered  it.   It  referred
specifically to the reference  to  his  suffering  from  different  symptoms
including general aches and pains and problems with his urine.   It  may  be
that in making that point Mr Plowright had  in  mind  the  failure  of  the
tribunal to refer to the mental health concerns which  had  been  mentioned.
I do appreciate that mental health difficulties of a  certain  severity  are
capable of impacting upon a person's ability to give  reliable  evidence  or
to properly represent themselves if called upon to do  so.   But  I  do  not
think the failure to specifically  mention  mental  health  means  that  the
matter was overlooked by the tribunal.  Its central point as to  health  was
that the evidence did not support the proposition  that  the  problems  were
such as to prevent him from attending a  hearing.  It  was  entitled  to  so
conclude. Further, whilst I accept Mr Plowright's commonsense argument  that
even a very ill claimant might attend if there was no  other  option,  there
is nothing in the tribunal's written reasons which suggests that it  decided
he was fit to attend simply because he had, as a matter of  fact,  attended.
Rather, what it was doing was assessing the  written  medical  evidence  and
what that did or did not tell it.

17.   As to the funding issue, I raised at the hearing the possibility  that
the claimant might have been able to secure public  funding.   Mr  Plowright
argued that that may have been a matter which the tribunal was  required  to
enquire into prior to refusing to adjourn.  I see why he  makes  that  point
but, in my judgment, the tribunal did not have to raise the issue  with  the
claimant itself.  It was reasonable for it to have  assumed  that  any  such
possible entitlement would have been considered at some point in  the  past.
In any event there was no suggestion made to it that the claimant  did  want
an adjournment expressly to apply for public funding.

18.   I was concerned about  the  possibility  notwithstanding  the  primacy
with which it had said it was attaching  to  fairness,  the  tribunal  might
have failed to properly consider, address and factor  into  its  adjournment
decision, the possibility of the claimant  obtaining  funds  to  instruct  a
representative in time for any reconvened hearing  which  there  might  have
been resulting from any adjournment.  My primary  concern  as  to  that  was
that the tribunal, on the face of what it had said in its  written  reasons,
might have simply assumed for itself that  there  was  no  prospect  of  the
claimant's financial position changing for the better so as  to  enable  him
to re-secure representation, without enquiring as  to  that  possibility  of
him.  But it is  clear  from  what  I  have  set  out  from  its  Record  of
Proceedings that the claimant did, in fact, give  some  information  to  the
tribunal about his finances.  So it cannot be said that the tribunal  simply
assumed what the position might be without hearing anything  from  him.   In
my judgment, it was open to the tribunal on the material before it  and  for
the reasons it gave, to conclude that there was  not  a  realistic  prospect
(notwithstanding what has subsequently happened) that the claimant would  be
able to fund representation in the future.  Having reached that  view  there
was no longer any sensible  basis  for  it  to  adjourn  in  the  hope  that
representation might be secured in the future.

19.   I do not agree that the tribunal focused too much on "delay".  It  did
say that its  primary  concern  was  fairness  and  I  see  nothing  in  its
reasoning to suggest that, having  identified  that  as  the  key  issue  as
indeed it had to do following Nwaigwe, it lost sight of that.  There were  a
number of points which had  been  made  in  the  written  grounds  which  Mr
Plowright did not pursue though he  did  not  withdraw  them.   But  in  the
circumstances, and given that Mr Plowright  rightly  focused  upon  what  he
rightly thought was most relevant, I can be  relatively  brief  about  those
other points.  In fact, I am not sure that  I  wholly  understand  the  very
first point which is made under the heading "grounds" but what is said  does
appear to rely upon a form of rule 21(2) of the First-tier Tribunal's  Rules
of Procedure which is no longer in existence and was  not  in  existence  at
the time the tribunal heard the appeal.  The tribunal did,  contrary  to  an
implied suggestion in the grounds,  and  as  I  have  already  said,  attach
primacy to fairness.  It was clearly aware that  there  would  be  potential
prejudice to the claimant if an adjournment was not granted and that is  why
it gave such careful consideration to the issue.  It  was  not  required  to
perform what is described as "an interrogation"  of  the  letter  which  had
been written by the GP.  It certainly had to consider and take its  contents
into account.  But it did that.  Anything else said in the grounds  which  I
have not expressly referred to above does not  go  beyond  re-argument  with
the tribunal's clearly reasoned decision not to adjourn.

20.   Having decided not to adjourn the tribunal went  on  to  give  careful
consideration to the case which the claimant had presented to it.   It  made
a number of clear, cogent  and  persuasive  findings  with  respect  to  the
claimant's credibility and with respect to  the  plausibility  of  what  was
being said.  In my judgment, on  the  material  and  on  the  basis  of  the
arguments before it, its analysis was faultless.  It can always be said,  of
course, that representation might make a difference.   In  general  I  would
certainly accept the truth of that proposition.  But here  not  only  is  it
the case that the points made  by  the  tribunal  regarding  the  claimant's
veracity and the plausibility of his account were  particularly  cogent  and
persuasive, but nothing has been said with any precision as  to  what  other
arguments might have been canvassed and what other evidence might have  been
presented which would have been  capable  of  making  a  difference  to  the
outcome.

21.   In the circumstances,  therefore,  I  have  concluded  as  my  primary
conclusion that the tribunal did not err in law in refusing  to  adjourn  or
in its explanation as to the reasons why it was refusing  to  adjourn.   But
even if I am wrong about  that  I  would  conclude  that  it  has  not  been
demonstrated that, even if the tribunal had erred in that  regard,  that  in
the particular  circumstances  of  this  case  any  such  error  could  have
impacted upon the outcome.

22.   In the circumstances the  claimant's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal
fails.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:     Dated: 28 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
