

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11454/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decision under Rule 34                         |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|Without a hearing                              |                              |
|12th June 2020                                 |On 23rd June 2020             |
|                                               |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     MS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS(P)

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  MS.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

         1. FtT Judge Forster dismissed MS's appeal against the refusal  of
            his international protection and human rights claim for reasons
            set out  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22nd  January  2020.
            Permission to appeal was granted by  FtT  judge  Bird  on  11th
            March 2020. Directions for the further conduct  of  the  appeal
            were sent and,  in  the  circumstances  surrounding  COVID  19,
            provision was made for the question of  whether  there  was  an
            error of law and if so whether the decision of  the  FtT  Judge
            should be set aside to be determined on the papers.


         2. Both parties complied with the directions; the appellant sought
            an oral hearing but did not give  any  reasons  for  requesting
            such a hearing. The respondent has expressed her consent to the
            decision on error of law being taken on the papers.

         3. In the absence of any reasons by  the  appellant  for  an  oral
            hearing of the error of law  issue  and  having  in  any  event
            considered  whether  an  oral  hearing  was  necessary,  I   am
            satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the  appellant
            and the respondent together  with  the  papers  before  me  are
            sufficient to enable me to  be  able  to  take  a  decision  on
            whether there is an error of law in the decision of the FtT and
            if so whether the decision should be set aside, on  the  papers
            and without hearing oral submissions.

            Grounds of appeal.

         4. The appellant relied upon 3 grounds of appeal:

             Ground 1:     the judge erred in  law  in  making  an  adverse
            finding on the credibility of the appellant's  account  because
            of  discrepancies  between  his  screening  interview  and  his
            substantive interview. The first claimed discrepancy was not  a
            discrepancy when read  properly  and  in  the  context  of  the
            questions asked; the second discrepancy was in relation to  the
            return of his brother which  were  mistakes  in  the  screening
            interview of where the brother returned to and  a  misquote  by
            the judge of the appellant's evidence.
             Ground 2: the judge erred in law in failing to  give  adequate
            reasons  for  his  finding  that  the  appellant's  sur   place
            activities were not because of genuinely held  political  views
            but in order to support an asylum claim.
             Ground 3: the judge  erred  in  law  in  having  accepted  the
            appellant attended demonstrations and had a  Facebook  account,
            the judge failed to correctly apply the caselaw to those facts.

         5. Judge Bird, in granting permission stated it was arguable  that
            in  finding  the  discrepancies  undermined   the   appellant's
            credibility, the FtT judge had failed to give adequate  reasons
            and secondly that it was  arguable  the  judge  had  failed  to
            adequately assess the risk to the appellant in the light of the
            findings on sur place activity.


            Ground 1


         6. The FtT judge found:


            13. At the screening interview, the appellant stated  that  his
                brother was a member of a political party (SCR4.1)  but  at
                the asylum interview he said  that  he  did  not  know  his
                brother's status within the  KDPI  (AIR  Q.55).  When  this
                inconsistency was put to him, the appellant stated that  he
                was a member, but he did not know the details (AIR Q.56). I
                find his  answer  to  be  vague  and  I  would  expect  the
                appellant to know more about his brother's involvement with
                the KDPI because it is the reason, he  says  that  he  left
                Iran and the base upon which his protection claim is built.


            14. At the screening interview, the appellant stated  that  two
                days before he left  Iran,  his  brother  returned  to  the
                village to carry out  political  activities  for  the  KDPI
                )SCR4.1).At the asylum interview he said that  he  did  not
                know if his brother had returned to the village, just  that
                he had returned to Iran (AIR Q.75). I find this  highlights
                the appellant's inability to give consistent evidence which
                undermines the reliability of his evidence as a whole.
            15. ...
            16. ...His claim is based on what he says he was told  by  Haji
                Wahid who went to him on 20 July 2019 while he was  working
                on his family's farm. The appellant claims he was told that
                the Iranian authorities had raided his home,  arrested  his
                parents  because  of  his  brother's  activities  and  were
                looking for him. The appellant's evidence about whether his
                brother had returned to the village is not  clear.  He  did
                not  have  any  contact  with  his  brother  himself.   The
                appellant has not provided any evidence about his brother's
                alleged activities that could establish a  connection  with
                any action taken by the authorities. The  appellant  claims
                he was immediately taken somewhere by  Haji  Wahid  in  his
                car....
            17. The appellant was vague about what exactly he was  told  by
                Haji Wahid. On his evidence he accepted the events as  told
                to him by Mr Wahid  without  question.  The  appellant  was
                asked if he had asked Mr Wahid any question,  but  he  said
                that he did not do so. The appellant's evidence was that he
                did not ask about his parent's whereabouts  or  welfare  or
                seek more information about his brother's activities. I  do
                not find that to be credible because in  the  circumstances
                described  the  appellant  would  have   wanted   as   much
                information as possible. I  find  it  is  implausible  that
                arrangements could have been made within hours to  get  the
                appellant out of the country. The appellant was  asked  but
                could not explain who paid the agent that took him away. It
                would have been expensive. Mr Wahid is not a  relative  and
                was described as a good friend of  the  appellant's  father
                but without explanation it is not credible  he  would  have
                paid for the journey.
                .....
         7. In his answers during  the  screening  interview,  he  said  he
            hadn't paid the agent "any money yet", who was a friend and  he
            helped save his life (3.3). He was also asked:
            9. Town and country of birth.  A:  Altun  Saru,  Iran  (Islamic
               Republic of)
            4.1. please briefly explain all of the reasons why  you  cannot
            return to your home country. A: My brother was a  member  of  a
            political party I do not know any details regarding  this.  Two
            days before I left my country my brother came to the town where
            I lived to do some political activities and for that reason the
            authorities believed I had helped arrange this with my  brother
            and they came to arrest me and raided my house  however  I  was
            not home that day and somebody who knew me told me  about  this
            and told me to leave the country. So I left IRN in fear  of  my
            life 2 days later.


         8. During his substantive interview the appellant was asked  where
            he lived and said Upper Altun (Altuni Saru),  which  was  where
            his parents and  brother  lived.  He  was  asked  if  he  lived
            anywhere else in Iran and replied no. (questions 9, 11,12).  He
            confirmed he was content  with  the  answers  he  gave  in  the
            Screening interview (questions 22 and 23). He was then asked  a
            series of questions about his home:


                 Q30: Is Upper Altun a city a town, can you explain for me.
                 A30:it is a small village


                 Q31. Where is it?
                 A31. Do you mean which city is close to the village


                 Q32. So is your village in a city?
                 A32. Our village is close to Saqiz


            The appellant was then  asked  questions  about  his  brother's
            political activity:


                 Q50. What political party did your brother support?
                 A50. A democratic party, Kurdistan Democratic Party or(sic)
                 Iran (KDPI)


                 Q51. Do you know when he began to support  or  follow  this
                 political party?
                 A51. Around 4 or 5 months ago approximately.


                 Q52. Did you live with your brother during this time?
                 A52. No.


                 Q53. Where did he live?
                 A53. I don't know where he lived, he is involved with  that
                 party  and  they  have  their  own  bases.  I  don't   have
                 information about this political party they have their  own
                 bases and headquarters.


                 Q54. Did you brother not inform you were he  was  going  so
                 you could keep in touch with him?
                 A54. No


                 Q55. Do you know what his status within this party was?
                 A55. I don't know


                 Q56. In your SCR you state that your brother was  a  member
                 of this political party, can you explain this?
                 A56. Yes he was a member but I don't know the details.


                 Q57. How do you know he was a member and not a supporter?
                 A57. When my brother left, he didn't leave on  his  own  he
                 left with a group of other people from our  village.  Later
                 the families of those people went to visit their  sons  and
                 they also met my brother and they tell when  they  returned
                 they told my mother. They told my mother that he  was  with
                 that party and he was a member.


            There then followed various questions about  his  knowledge  of
            his mother's knowledge, whether his brother's absence had  been
            reported, knowledge of  treatment  handed  out  to  people  who
            followed the KDPI. He was then asked


                 Q71.  What happened before you fled Iran?
                 A71. My brother returned to Iran to  carry  out  activities
                 for the party, he was  reported  to  the  authorities,  the
                 authorities were unable to arrest him, so they came to  our
                 house, on that day when they came I was not at home  I  was
                 away working, they mistreated my parents and they took them
                 away, I don't know what happened to them since I don't know
                 if they are still alive or if they are dead, if I was there
                 then they would have taken me to. They were arrested by the
                 authorities had massively affected me.


                 Q75. Did  you  know  your  brother  had  returned  to  your
                 village?
                 A75. I don't know, but he was in that area, I don't know if
                 he returned to the village or the surrounding area  but  he
                 was in Iran.


                 Q76. How do you know this information?
                 A76. The person who came to tell me what had happened  told
                 me this.


            The appellant was then asked a number of questions about how he
            found about about his brother and  his  relationship  with  the
            person who told him. The appellant confirmed he did not ask him
            any questions and he trusted him.


         9. The appellant's solicitors wrote to the  respondent  after  the
            screening interview and clarified that the appellant  had  said
            during the screening interview that his  brother  was  involved
            with the KDPI and that his parents had  been  taken  away,  but
            those matters had not been recorded.


        10. After the  substantive  interview  the  appellant's  solicitors
            wrote to the respondent with clarification as to the length  of
            time his brother had been away from home as 4 to  5  years  and
            not months as recorded in Q51; and that  clarification  of  the
            screening interview records had been sent and his response that
            he was content,  as  recorded  in  the  substantive  interview,
            should be read in that light.


        11. It is difficult to understand how the  FtT  judge  reached  the
            conclusion that the appellant had given  vague  and  discrepant
            answers to questions about his brother's political  involvement
            either  within  the  substantive  interview  or   between   the
            screening interview and the substantive  interview.  The  judge
            makes a sweeping statement as to lack of credibility  upon  the
            foundation of  discrepancy  yet  has  failed  to  consider  the
            explanation given by the appellant or provide a reason why  the
            appellant should be expected to know of his brother's political
            involvement. The background material makes plain the extent  to
            which the authorities clamp down on political  opposition;  the
            appellant's evidence was that he had not seen his brother since
            he left Iran and there was no evidence  that  the  brother  (or
            anyone else) had tried to recruit the appellant.

        12. It may be that the ultimate credibility finding is the same but
            at the very least the judge should have approached the evidence
            as it was before  him  and  reached  his  conclusions  on  that
            evidence with reasons why he discounted the  explanation  given
            by the appellant. This ground of appeal is not  an  attempt  to
            reargue the appeal, as submitted by the respondent.

        13. The FtT  judge  has  erred  in  law  in  his  findings  on  the
            credibility of the appellant based, as  they  were,  mainly  on
            matters  that  were  not  actually  discrepancies  and  without
            considering the explanation provided by the appellant.

            Grounds 2 and 3

        14. These two grounds essentially deal with risk on  return  given,
            in particular, the appellant's Facebook activity as well as the
            findings on sur place activity. The judge finds the  appellant,
            who cannot read or write, did  not  make  the  entries  on  his
            Facebook account. That has not been challenged in  the  grounds
            seeking  permission  to  appeal.  The  respondent  submits  the
            appellant could simply close  down  his  Facebook  account,  or
            remove all  the  postings  because  they  were  not  a  genuine
            reflection of his political beliefs.


        15. Although the judge has engaged with the  appellant's  claim  to
            attend demonstrations and has made findings  on  that  and  sur
            place activity, they  are  predicated  on  adverse  credibility
            findings such that the appellant cannot be  believed.  Although
            the appellant's account as to his brother and  the  reasons  he
            fled are infected with an error of law and that has  no  direct
            bearing on the sur place activity, it does to the  extent  that
            his overall credibility has been adversely impacted  upon.  The
            judge has not engaged with the impact of the  Facebook  account
            on risk on return and nor has he engaged with relevant  caselaw
            on Facebook accounts. The judge has erred in law.


      Conclusion


        16. The judge has erred in law in his findings on  the  credibility
            of  the  appellant's  account  regarding   his   brother.   The
            appellant's  credibility  has  an  impact  upon  the   findings
            regarding his current political beliefs and involvement, it may
            impact upon his Facebook entries and thus risk on return.


        17. I set aside the decision of the FtT judge in its entirety. This
            is an appeal where significant and principal findings  of  fact
            are  required  and  thus,  in  accordance  with  the   practice
            direction, I remit the hearing of this appeal to  the  FtT  for
            further hearing (not before FtT Judge Forster).

    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision and remit the hearing of  the  appeal  to  the
    FtT.




    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
12th June 2020

