
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11372/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated:   |
|On 19 October 2018                    |On 5 November 2018                   |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  RAFIK [S]

                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jacobs (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal);  whereupon  it  allowed
his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 22 October 2017 to
refuse to grant him international  protection.   Permission  to  appeal  was
given by a Tribunal Judge on 30 May 2018.

2.    The claimant, who was born on 17 April 1958, is a  Yemeni  national.
He is married and his wife is  a  dependent  upon  his  asylum  claim.   The
couple have three adult children who reside neither in the Yemen nor in  the
United Kingdom (UK).

3.    The claimant entered the UK having obtained a visit visa.  He says  he
actually entered by air on 20 March 2017. It is recorded that  he  claimed
asylum on 3 August 2017. In seeking international protection, he  asserted
that he would be at risk in Yemen due  to  his  political  affiliations  and
connections and due to his status as an academic.   He  explained  that  his
wife is a cousin of the former Foreign Minister of Yemen, a person who  had
headed a mission by the  now  Government  in  exile,  when  it  was  seeking
assistance from the Saudi Arabian Government to overthrow the Houthi rebels
who were attempting to take control of Yemen. He asserts  that  that  former
Foreign Minister has now been sentenced to death by those  now  in  control
and he asserts he himself would be at risk due to the  connection.  He  also
expresses a fear he would be harmed  in  consequence  of  his  son's  former
political activity in that country.

4.    As noted, the Secretary of State refused the claim  for  international
protection on 22 October 2017.  It is not entirely clear to  me  from  the
detailed written explanation of  the  decision,  whether  the  Secretary  of
State believed all of what the appellant had claimed.   But  he  might  have
done.  However, she thought that even if he was at risk in his home area  he
would be able to relocate to Aden. The claimant  appealed  to  the  tribunal
and his appeal was heard on 21 March 2018.  He  was  represented  at  that
hearing by Mr C Jacobs of Counsel who also represented him before me.  The
Secretary of State was then represented by one Mr Z Mughal, a Home Office
Presenting Officer.  The tribunal allowed the  appeal.   It  produced  brief
written reasons for its decision.  This is the salient part of what  it  had
to say:

      "     4.   At the outset, I should say that the appellant's  case  was
      put by Mr Jacobs on the basis that article 15(c) of the Qualification
      Directive applies so that refugee status  is  made  out  by  reference
      thereto.  He submitted that the current situation within Yemen  is  to
      be considered in the light of the decision of the  Upper Tribunal  in
      ZMM (Art.15c) [CG] [2017]  UKUT 263.   He  also  submitted  that  the
      objective or background evidence in respect of Yemen is now  different
      to that which obtained at the time of  the  respondent's  decision  in
      October 2017 in that  of  the  security  situation  has  deteriorated
      further.

            5.   The core facts were not in dispute.  The  appellant's  wife
      is a cousin to the former Foreign Minister of Yemen, who  headed  the
      mission by the now government in exile, when it was seeking assistance
      from  the  Saudi Arabian  government  to  overthrow  Houthi  rebels.
      Accordingly, Houthi rebels have indicated that he has  been  sentenced
      to death, albeit, seemingly, by a court  of  no  particular  standing.
      The appellant is an academic and, he says, his  son  is  somebody  who
      formed a political party in Yemen but has now fled that country.

            6.   The appellant previously resided in  Abu Dhabi,  but  says
      that he has lost  his  job  in  that  country,  because  he  lost  his
      accommodation and so he cannot return to reside in the U.A.E.

            7.   The appellant gave evidence by adopting the content of  his
      witness statement dated 6 December 2017 as his evidence in chief.  His
      veracity was not challenged and I accept the  thrust  of  his  factual
      evidence.

            8.   The respondent refused the application on  the  basis  that
      although it accepted that there is an ongoing civil war  situation  in
      certain parts of the country, that did not apply to the  governate  of
      Aden and so the appellant could return to Aden.

            9.   Mr Jacobs made the case, by reference to recent  objective
      material, that Aden governate is as  badly  afflicted  by  civil  war,
      indiscriminate violence and a breakdown in law and order that it is no
      more secure than any other part of Yemen.  Indeed, he went further and
      submitted that the current objective evidence is to  the  effect  that
      governance has all but broken down  in  Yemen,  which  has  ceased  to
      function as a sovereign state.  It is little  more  than  a  territory
      torn apart by civil war, where rival tribes, factions or warlords  vie
      for control.

            10.  Mr Jacobs took me through the objective evidence  that  he
      relied upon, which is noted in my Record of  Proceedings.   I  do  not
      propose to go through it in detail because  I  am  satisfied  that  it
      points only in one direction and establishes that,  certainly  at  the
      present time, the situation in Yemen is such that there is  a  serious
      threat to civilian life by reason of indiscriminate  violence  because
      of the internal armed conflict going on in the country and  by  reason
      of the Saudi involvement, which involves bombing those thought  to  be
      opposed to the so-called government in exile.  It is  also  blockading
      the country's ports.

            11.  Accordingly, I allow the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant  is  a  refugee  by  reference  not  article 15(c)  of  the
      Qualification Direction."

5.    The Secretary of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal, contending that the  tribunal  had  erred  in  law  through
seeming to decide that the claimant is a refugee on the basis  that  country
conditions throughout  Yemen  meant  that  the  threshold  provided  for  in
Article 15c of the Qualification Directive had been  met.   The  Judge  who
granted permission to  appeal,  and  the  grant  was  unsurprising,  did  so
because she thought it "at least  arguable  that  the  judge  conflated  the
concept of refugee status with that of  humanitarian  protection".   As  she
went on to explain, if a claimant succeeds in his appeal for refugee  status
then  that  claimant  is  then  excluded  from  a  grant   of   humanitarian
protection.

6.    Permission  having  been  granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could be considered  whether  or  not
the tribunal had erred in law and,  if  so,  what  should  flow  from  that.
Representation  was  as  stated  above   and   I   am   grateful   to   each
representative.

7.    Mr McVeety, for the Secretary of State, contended that  the  tribunal
had indeed erred through effectively suggesting it was allowing  the  appeal
on Article 15c grounds but then concluding that the claimant is a  refugee.
Mr McVeety said, in the circumstances, he would be content for  me  to  set
aside the tribunal's decision and substitute my own  decision  allowing  the
claimant's appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds  under  Article 15c.
Mr Jacobs, corrected what appeared to represent a misunderstanding  on  the
part of the tribunal as to what it was he had  actually  argued  before  the
tribunal.  He had not put the case on the basis  that  Article 15c  applied
"so that refugee status is made out" (see  paragraph 4  of  the  tribunal's
written reasons).  His argument had been to the  effect  that  the  claimant
was at risk in his home area of Yemen for the reasons connected to  his  and
his family's political affiliations and his  status  as  an  academic.   So,
absent an ability to take advantage of an internal  flight  alternative,  he
was a refugee. He had then argued the  claimant  could  not  do  so  because
conditions throughout Yemen were such as to breach Article 15c.  So,  there
was no available internal place of refuge.

8.     Notwithstanding  that   clarification   Mr Jacobs,   having   taken
instructions, indicated that he was content for me to do as Mr McVeety  had
invited me to do.  That is to say, he was content for me to  set  aside  the
tribunal's decision and to remake it by allowing the  claimant's  appeal  on
humanitarian protection grounds based upon Article 15c.

9.    I have decided to set aside the tribunal's decision.  In  my  judgment
it may have contained a number of different legal errors.  But only  one  is
raised in the application for permission to appeal and I am content  to  set
the decision aside on the basis of that ground alone.  My having  done  that
there is agreement between the parties to the effect that  I  should  remake
the decision and as to how I should do so.  Mr McVeety  does  not  seek  to
persuade me, with respect to  remaking  and  of  course  his  concession  is
limited only to this case, that there is not an Article 15c risk throughout
Yemen.

10.   In light of the above, but in a  way  which  is  not  intended  to  be
binding upon decision makers including First-tier Tribunals, I remake  the
decision on the basis that, if the claimant was returned to Yemen, he  would
face an Article 15c risk wherever, in that country, he was  to  attempt  to
live.

Decision

The decision of the tribunal which was sent to the parties on 28 March 2018
is set aside.  That is because it contained errors of law.

The Upper Tribunal goes on to  remake  the  decision:   In  doing  so,  the
Upper Tribunal allows the claimant's appeal from the Secretary  of  State's
decision of 22 October 2017 on humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed:                      Date: 30 October 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

Anonymity

I have not directed anonymity in this case.   The  First-tier Tribunal  did
not do so and I was not invited to do so.


Signed:                      Dated: 30 October 2018

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee has been paid and since no fee is payable, there can be no  fee
award.


Signed:                      Date: 30 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

