
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11961/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2019                              |On 18 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                  ahmad [m]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr [M] against  the  decision  of  Judge  Geraint
    Jones QC who dismissed his appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.  The judge found the appellant to  lack  credibility.   There
    had been an application for an adjournment to obtain  evidence  from  a
    witness, a Mr [B].  That was refused.

2.   So as I say he found the appellant to lack  credibility  and  concluded
    that in the alternative he would be able to relocate internally  within
    Lebanon on the basis of what he said was to be found within the  expert
    report of Dr Fatah concerning opportunities for homosexuals to live  in
    the open to some extent in Beirut.  So the appeal was dismissed on  the
    basis first of a lack of credibility and secondly  on  the  alternative
    basis that internal relocation was feasible.

3.   The decision of the judge was challenged  and  permission  was  refused
    initially by a First-tier Tribunal Judge and  then  subsequently  by  a
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal.  It is  relevant  at  this  stage  to  say
    something about the points of challenge.  The first point was the  fact
    that the judge did not realise that Mr [B] was the same person  as  [S]
    with whom the appellant claimed to have had a relationship  and  indeed
    the judge said [S] might have been an obvious witness  to  support  the
    appellant's account but he neither gave evidence nor provided a witness
    statement so he declined to find as a fact  that  any  such  person  or
    relationship existed whereas of course there was  a  witness  statement
    from Mr [B], who had described himself as being also known as  [S],  in
    the bundle.  So the judge confused  those  two  points  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge who refused permission considered there was an  arguable
    error in that respect.

4.   A further point was in relation to the age that the appellant was  when
    he began his relationship with Mostafa and the argument here  was  that
    he had not said he was 21 at the time, that he had relations with a man
    in the United Kingdom a hairdresser when he was 21 and  the  judge  had
    confused this too.

5.   As regards this the matter seems to have  been  regarded  also  by  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge as being an arguable matter.   Other  issues  were
    regarded as points of disagreement but the judge went on  to  say  that
    with regard to internal relocation in any event there was  no  arguable
    error of law  in  the  finding  that  he  would  be  able  to  relocate
    internally to Beirut.

6.   The matter then went on  to  a  Cart  judicial  review  and  Lambert  J
    concluded that the matter was arguable,  that  there  was  an  arguable
    failure to consider the expert report as a whole, and that was regarded
    as a key  matter.   But  I  think  it  is  important  to  look  at  the
    credibility issues as well because as Ms Sanders  says  they  may  well
    colour internal relocation as if the  credibility  findings  are  sound
    that says one thing perhaps about the ability to relocate and  if  they
    are unsound then  that  might  put  the  findings  on  relocation  into
    difficulty.

7.   It seems to me clear as I think is common ground that the  judge  erred
    in the matter of identity with regard to Mr [B] and  [S]  and  it  does
    seem to me that that is a matter of materiality as to whether he had  a
    relationship of the kind he claims with the  person  he  claimed.   The
    judge fundamentally got that wrong and also in my view was wrong  about
    the point about the age.  His evidence was sufficiently clear that  the
    relationship with the hairdresser in the United Kingdom was when he was
    21 and not the relationship  with  Mostafa  when  he  would  have  been
    younger so there was no discrepancy there.

8.   Those seem to me to be matters  of  weight  and  need  to  be  properly
    evaluated and I do not consider the matter is  saved  by  the  internal
    relocation point.  There is quite a lot of detail in Dr Fatah's  report
    about internal  relocation  difficulties  for  Palestinians,  including
    problematic issues arising for homosexuals in the  Lebanon.   Certainly
    he does make the point that there are opportunities for homosexuals  to
    live in the open to some extent but he goes on to  refer  to  raids  on
    various establishments,  few of these are out of bounds to the  police,
    whatever  else  may  have  changed  on  paper,  shifting  the  cultural
    perceptions of homosexuality would take much longer, ambiguity  in  the
    law continues to provide a scope of violence against and violations  to
    the rights of the LGBTQ+ community so he may face discrimination on his
    return.

9.   There needs to be a proper evaluation of that evidence in the light  of
    proper credibility findings that has not been done and so this decision
    is set aside and it will have to be remade in full  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in Hatton Cross.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is to the extent set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              14th March 2019




