
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/11959/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 April 2019                    |On 15 April 2019                   |
|                                          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    F A S
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Appellant in person
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity direction made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I
make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant.




2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Anthony promulgated on 27 December 2018, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant is an Iraqi national who was born on 01 January  1982.  The
appellant entered the UK on 14 February 2005. He claimed  asylum,  and  that
application for asylum was refused by the respondent on 4  April  2005.  The
appellant  appealed,  and  his  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a  determination
promulgated on 20 May 2005. On 29 August 2018  the  appellant  made  further
representations which the  respondent  considered  as  a  fresh  claim.  The
respondent refused that renewed protection claim on 28 September 2018.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Anthony ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  17  January  2017  Judge  Grant-
Hutchison granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected herself by failing to
      (a) clarify whether she was departing from the whole was only  partial
      aspects of the country guidance case of  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -internal
      relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) in coming to her decision and (b)
      make any findings on the evidence of the  first  witness  which  could
      have  made  a  material  difference  to  the  Judge's  decision   with
      particular reference to the appellant's private life in the UK and the
      threat to his moral and physical integrity in Iraq.

The Hearing

6. The appellant was unrepresented. English is not his  first  language.  He
was  accompanied  by  a  friend,  Rebin  Sabir.  Lifeline  options  CIC  had
previously represented the appellant but on 1 April  2019  to  explain  that
they would not  be  attended  that  hearing  -  the  author  of  the  letter
explained that he was not qualified to represent  the  appellant  -  however
written submissions were advanced.

7. I spoke to Mr Walker, who represents the respondent. I  suggested  to  Mr
Walker the it may be argued that [21] of  the  decision  is  not  adequately
reasoned, and that  the  Judge's  decision  not  to  follow  extant  country
guidance caselaw at [18] is inadequately reasoned.

8. Mr Walker agreed  that  both  [18]  and  [21]  of  the  decision  contain
material errors of law. He said that he would  not  resist  the  grounds  of
appeal.


Analysis.

9. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd. He arrived in the  UK  on  14th  February
2005. He claimed asylum unsuccessfully. He appealed against the  refusal  of
asylum and in a determination promulgated on 22  May  2005  his  appeal  was
dismissed.  His  appeal  rights  were  exhausted  in  September  2005.   The
appellant made a fresh claim on 29 August 2018  which  was  refused  by  the
respondent on  28  September  2018.  It  is  against  that  refusal  of  the
appellant appeals.

10. At [12] of the decision the Judge tries to decide  where  the  appellant
comes from so that she can determine where  he  will  be  returned  to.  The
Judge finds that the appellant  was  born  in  Kirkuk,  but  last  lived  in
Sulaymaniyah. The Judge's findings  are  reinforced  by  the  principles  in
Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 000702. The Judge applies  the  same  principles  to
find, at [15], that the appellant's asylum claim cannot succeed.

11. Between [17] and [23] the Judge combines  consideration  of  entitlement
to humanitarian protection and articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds of  appeal.  At
[18] the Judge does not give adequate reasons for accepting  the  submission
that AAH (Iraqi Kurds -internal relocation) should not  be  followed.  In  R
and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982 the Court of Appeal endorsed  Practice
Direction 18.4 which states that any failure to follow a  clear,  apparently
applicable, country guidance case or to show why it does not  apply  to  the
case in question is likely to be regarded as a ground for review  or  appeal
on a point of law.  The Court of Appeal said that it represented  a  failure
to take a material matter into account.

12. At [21] the Judge does not give adequate reasons for  finding  that  the
appellant can fly directly into Sulaymaniyah international airport. At  [18]
the  Judge  refers  to  evidence  and  submissions  which  is  not  properly
analysed. The Judge does not  explain  why  she  places  weight  on  certain
evidence nor does she explain how she reaches  the  conclusion  that  return
will be direct to Sulaymaniyah when the country guidance caselaw  says  that
return is via Baghdad.

13. In KO (Iraq) v SSHD [2018] CSOH 71 the  Court  of  Session  reduced  the
SSHD's decision to refuse to treat further Article 8 submissions as a  fresh
Article 8 claim.  When considering paragraph 276ADE the SSHD had  failed  to
take into account the  relevant  CPIN  indicating  the  "dire"  humanitarian
situation in the KRG in circumstances where the petitioner was  unlikely  to
be able to obtain any employment as he was not fully medically fit  and  had
been  unemployed  for  years.   The  decision  letter  had  only  considered
positive features about reintegration but had made no  attempt  to  consider
the very real  obstacles  to  integration  which  existed  -  in  particular
personal problems for the petitioner in  a  situation  which  appeared  very
problematic even for an able-bodied adult with employment skills.

14. The Judge's decision relies strongly on  a  finding  that  international
air routes into IKR have  opened  up  and  gives  no  consideration  to  the
ability of the appellant to enter IKR nor the  circumstances  the  appellant
will find in IKR. At [13] the Judge finds that the  appellant  was  born  in
Kirkuk but has lived in Sulaymaniyah since  he  was  a  primary  school  age
child. The Judge goes on to  treat  Sulaymaniyah  as  the  appellant's  Home
area. AAH says that the place of birth is crucial to recovering a CSID,  and
that the place of birth defines a "home area". Case law says that Kirkuk  is
an  area  of  internal  armed  conflict.  The  Judge's  findings  focus   on
Sulaymaniyah; her conclusions that it is to there that  the  appellant  will
return  are  unsafe.  At  [15]  the  Judge  relies  heavily  on   the   2005
determination, and says there has been  no  change  since  then,  even  when
deciding the location of the appellant's home area. That finding  is  unsafe
in light of the guidance given in AAH.

15. The Judge's article 8 proportionality exercise  is  found  between  [24]
and  [30].  The  Judge   restricts   her   proportionality   assessment   to
consideration of s.117B of the 2002 Act. The Judge carries out  no  analysis
of the evidence of private life advanced by the appellant. It is not  enough
to say (at [30])

      There is no reason why I should consider any private life rights....

The Judge's proportionality assessment is inadequate.

16. These are material errors of law;  the  errors  fundamentally  undermine
consideration of the qualification directive and articles  2,  3  &  8  ECHR
grounds of appeal. Because the decision is tainted by errors of law,  I  set
the decision aside.

17.  I consider whether or not I can substitute my own  decision.  There  is
an inadequacy of fact finding in the  First-tier's  decision.  I  find  that
none of the First-tier Judge's findings of  fact  can  be  preserved.  I  am
asked to remit this case the First-tier Tribunal. The material error of  law
in the  decision  relates  to  an  inadequacy  of  fact  finding.  I  cannot
substitute my own decision. A further fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

20. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Birmingham  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Anthony.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

22. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 27  December  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed
              Date 11 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

