
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11477/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 2 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 Michel [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R. Head, Counsel, instructed by Cassadys
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of the DRC who was born on 6 January 1990.  He
appealed against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha
promulgated on 18 January 2019 following a hearing that took place in
Birmingham on 3 December 2018.  The appellant had claimed that he was at
risk on return to the DRC and consequently was entitled to asylum or
humanitarian protection.

The judge did not believe the appellant.  It was apparent that credibility
was in issue from the outset and the judge's concluded that the appellant
had failed to give reliable evidence and, as a result of that, his claim
for international protection failed.  He did not believe that the appellant
had been engaged in political activities on behalf of APARECO in London or
that he came to the adverse attention of the authorities in the DRC as he
claimed; nor did he accept that he was involved in distributing leaflets
for APARECO in the DRC. His determination amounted to a comprehensive
rejection of the appellant's credibility, leading to his deciding to
dismiss the appeal.

There was before the judge a bundle.  It consisted of a statement of the
appellant at pages 1 to 4, a copy of his passport, a search warrant with a
translation, a lawyers' letter with translation and an APARECO letter dated
28 November 2017 at page 13 of that bundle.  I am satisfied that those
documents were referred to the judge, having considered the Record of
Proceedings.

In the course of the oral evidence that the appellant gave, he confirmed
the contents of his statement and, in particular, he confirmed the contents
of paragraph 15, in which he referred to a DHL envelope by which documents
had been sent to him on 26 November 2018.  Reference is made to the
passport, to the lawyers' letter, to the search warrant and the letter from
APARECO which is in the bundle.  It is also clear that those letters were
referred to in Counsel's submissions although there is no skeleton
argument, as far as I am aware, in which reference is made to them.

So, it follows that both the witness statement and the appellant's oral
evidence as well as the oral submissions referred to this documentation.
Some of the documentation is highlighted in a yellow highlighter.  I myself
use an orange highlighter.  The yellow highlighting appears to suggest that
the judge looked at these documents, at least in the course of the hearing.


Unfortunately, no reference is made to them in the body of the
determination.  They were material documents in that they tended to support
the appellant's claim of being at risk on return to the DRC and it was for
the judge to consider the weight that he attached to them and in particular
to make any assessment as to their authenticity, given that they were
before him and their provenance was, at least in part, provided by the
envelope from the DHL delivery.

It is not clear, (although there is an assumption), that he rejected these
documents or otherwise he could not have reached the findings that he did
reach.  He was required to make specific reference to them and to give his
reasons why he was attaching no weight to them or to the lawyer's letter.
For these reasons, I find that there was a material error in the course of
the preparation of this determination and I set the determination aside.

    This will require the decision to be re-made; new findings of fact are
    needed. As this is, in essence, a fresh hearing, it is better
    determined in the First-tier Tribunal.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                              22 August 2019
