
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11051/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 April 2018                        |On 26 April 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    K. U.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq who entered the UK unlawfully,  and
    who claimed asylum on 24 May 2017. That application was refused  on  16
    October 2017, and his appeal against that refusal came before the First-
    tier Tribunal at North Shields on 28 November 2017, when it  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hindson.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  on
    asylum grounds, but allowed on humanitarian protection  and  Article  3
    grounds in a decision promulgated on 18 December 2017.

 2. The Respondent's application for permission to appeal the decision  was
    granted by First tier Tribunal Judge Alis on 14 January 2018. There has
    been no  cross  appeal  by  the  Appellant,  and  the  grounds  of  the
    Respondent's challenge refer only to the decision to allow the  Article
    3 appeal, being silent  on  the  decision  to  allow  the  humanitarian
    protection appeal. Thus the matter comes before me.

 3. Both parties  are  agreed  before  me  that  the  Judge's  decision  is
    extremely brief. There is no reference to any relevant current  country
    guidance, beyond the cursory reference necessary to conclude  that  the
    Appellant's home lies within Diyala province, and that this is  one  of
    the "contested areas" referred to. This was not however an  issue  that
    was disputed before him.  Given  the  failure  to  provide  the  proper
    citations for the decisions referred to (they are cited  simply  as  AA
    and BA), the reader is left to infer that the Judge referred himself to
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (as opposed to  any  of  the
    other innumerable  decisions  entitled  AA),  and  to  BA  (Returns  to
    Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18.  The  Judge  may,  or  may  not,  have
    intended in addition to make reference to the Court of Appeal  decision
    of AA (Iraq) [2017 EWCA Civ 944, promulgated on 11  July  2017;  it  is
    impossible to tell.

 4. It is common ground before me that the Judge made no reference  to  the
    Appellant's admission at interview that the Appellant had  been  issued
    by the Iraqi authorities with a legitimate passport  [A2  Q1.8]  and  a
    legitimate  CSID  [B4  Q15].  Thus  he  never  considered  whether  the
    Appellant did in truth continue to enjoy possession of those documents.
    Nor did he consider  whether,  by  reference  to  the  current  country
    guidance, if he had genuinely lost them, he would be able to secure the
    issue of replacements either before leaving the UK for  Iraq,  or  upon
    arrival in Iraq. He also made no reference to the question  of  whether
    the Appellant's return to Iraq was feasible. The Judge appears to  have
    accepted however that the Appellant could travel in safety to the KRG -
    although without expressly looking at whether he would be able to do so
    from the point of return of Baghdad  airport.  He  concluded  that  the
    Appellant would be granted admission to the KRG for up to 40 days - but
    that he would be destitute within the KRG and  thus  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him as a fit able bodied Kurd to relocate  to  the
    KRG [23]. It is clear that this approach was not  consistent  with  the
    step by step required by the current country  guidance,  and  that  the
    findings of both primary and secondary fact were made in  ignorance  of
    relevant admissions made by the Appellant. Armed  with  a  valid  CSID,
    and, with the relocation  allowances  available  to  those  who  return
    voluntarily (and the Appellant is not entitled to advance a cased based
    upon a denial that he  would  accept  such  assistance)  there  was  no
    obvious reason for the Appellant to be destitute within the KRG at  any
    stage.

 5. Before me both parties  were  agreed  that  the  approach  to  internal
    relocation was materially flawed - whether that was looked  at  in  the
    context of the Article 3 appeal or the humanitarian protection  appeal.
    I agree. Upon due reflection they were also agreed that the entirety of
    the Judge's consideration and dismissal of the asylum appeal is  to  be
    found  within  three  sentences,  and  that  this  was  an   inadequate
    assessment of the evidence and the issues involved [21]. Again I agree.

 6. After time for reflection, and to take  instructions,  ultimately  both
    parties invited me to take a pragmatic approach to the  appeal,  namely
    to set aside the decision of the Judge on all grounds,  and  remit  the
    appeal for a de novo rehearing with no findings of fact  preserved.  In
    so doing both parties accepted  (a)  that  the  Respondent's  challenge
    could and should have raised the complaints that were identified today,
    (b) the complaints that were raised could and should have  been  raised
    in relation to the humanitarian protection appeal, and  not  merely  in
    relation to the Article 3 appeal, and, (c) that there could and  should
    have been a cross appeal on behalf of the Appellant in relation to  the
    dismissal of the asylum appeal. The adoption of such a pragmatic course
    by both parties is to be commended,  and  where  possible  facilitated;
    particularly where, as here, it is obvious that the decision  needs  to
    be set aside and remade. Accordingly I agree to the course requested.

 7. In circumstances such as this, where by reason of the  brevity  of  the
    decision it would appear that the relevant evidence  has  not  properly
    been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of
    law has been to deprive the parties of the opportunity for  their  case
    to be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph  7.2(a)
    of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the  extent  of
    the judicial fact finding exercise required is such that having  regard
    to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal  should
    be remitted to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the
    Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

 8. To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing  by  a  judge  other
    than Judge Hindson at the  North  Shields  Hearing  Centre.  A  Kurdish
    Sorani interpreter is required. The Appellant wishes to lodge a further
    witness statement, and so the appeal may be listed as  a  short  notice
    filler after 29 May 2018.

Notice of decision

 9. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 24 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

