
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/11215/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Tuesday 2 April 2019              |       On Friday 12 April 2019       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                             MRS JUSTICE JEFFORD
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     MS
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Walker, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,  as
this  appeal  raises  protection  issues,  it  is  appropriate  to  make  an
anonymity order.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the Appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Lingam promulgated on 11 December 2018 ("the Decision"). By  the
      Decision the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision dated 8 February 2017  refusing  his  protection
      and human rights claims made in the context of a  decision  to  deport
      him to Sierra Leone.  The Judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

2.    The Appellant has  raised  four  grounds  of  appeal  challenging  the
      Decision.  Those are in summary, that the  Decision  was  procedurally
      unfair in relation to certain aspects  of  the  credibility  findings,
      that the Judge failed to provide adequate reasons for the  credibility
      findings, that the hearing was procedurally unfair by  reason  of  the
      Judge's conduct and that the Judge did not provide sufficient  reasons
      for  upholding  the  certificate   under   section   72   Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the Section  72  Certificate").   We
      explore those in greater depth below.

3.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pickup
      on 10 January 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:


           "...2.      It is arguable that having agreed at the outset that
           the appellant and his sister would  not  be  asked  about  their
           experience of alleged sexual abuse in Italy, it was procedurally
           unfair for the judge to make in the decision adverse credibility
           findings on the written evidence without  indicating  that  this
           was an issue  in  question  and  enabling  the  concerns  to  be
           addressed at the hearing.  In addition, it is arguable that  the
           judge failed to act in accordance with the guidance in  relation
           to  assessing  discrepancies  in  the  evidence  of   vulnerable
           witnesses.
           3.    The other grounds have less merit and I am  not  persuaded
           there was an arguable impropriety in the conduct of the  hearing
           in relation to questions asked by  the  judge  and  refusing  to
           permit further examination in chief  on  issues  not  raised  in
           previous evidence.  However, all grounds may be argued."

4.    The matter comes  before  us  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
      disclose an error of law and to re-make the decision or remit  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Discussion and Conclusions

Ground three

5.          We can deal very shortly with ground three on which we  did  not
      hear submissions.  Miss Walker very properly accepted that, as Counsel
      who appeared below, if she wished to advance arguments based  on  what
      occurred at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, she would be  obliged  to
      cease to represent the Appellant as advocate before us in  order  that
      she could provide witness evidence.  There was no statement  from  her
      as to what occurred.  In light of our decision on the  other  grounds,
      Miss Walker and Ms Cunha agreed that it was not necessary to deal with
      this ground and no point would be served by adjourning to  allow  Miss
      Walker to pursue it.

Ground one

6.           As  we  also  identified  at  the  hearing,  ground  one   (the
      procedural fairness ground) was, as Judge  Pickup  observed  the  most
      promising.   Moreover,  this  may  impact  on   the   other   grounds.
      Accordingly, we deal with this first.

7.          We accept that,  to  some  extent,  this  ground  too  turns  on
      factual evidence as to  what  occurred  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      However, there is no dispute about what  happened,  and  we  permitted
      Miss Walker to elaborate.  She said that, prior to  the  hearing,  she
      discussed with the Presenting Officer the issues which were likely  to
      form the basis of his cross-examination.  This is because part of  the
      Appellant's case is that he was sexually abused during a period  spent
      in Italy in the course of his journey to the UK.  A psychiatric report
      produced on his behalf  supported  his  story  in  that  regard.   The
      Presenting Officer confirmed that, so far as he  was  concerned,  what
      had happened to  the  Appellant  and  his  sister  in  Italy  was  not
      relevant.  The issue was whether the Appellant would  be  at  risk  on
      return to Sierra Leone now.  Miss Walker accepted that this was not  a
      concession.  However, at the outset of the hearing, she had  explained
      that position to the Judge who said she was happy to proceed  in  that
      way.  No questions were asked of either the Appellant  or  his  sister
      about their journey from Nigeria (to which they first went from Sierra
      Leone) to the UK or what had happened to them in Italy.

8.          However, at [49] to [53] of the  Decision,  the  Judge  said  as
      follows:

            "49. The following has  raised  considerable  concerns  for  me.
           Both his sister (who gave  oral  evidence  before  me)  and  his
           mother (see her letter) allegation that his sister was  enslaved
           on arrival in Italy and forced to work as a prostitute in  Italy
           is not credible because his letter (F6)  does  not  support  the
           allegation.  The appellant has not sought to address the obvious
           discrepancy in their accounts.
            50.  His letter  (F6)  contrary  to  his  subsequent  allegation
           states "...When she came to the UK to study she could not  leave
           me there because I was underage and could not look after myself.
            So my sister and mother agreed for me to stay with her  and  my
           mother in the UK..."Hence his account is wholly different to the
           sister's account that a kind Samaritan intervened  to  help  her
           'escape' from her 'situation' and come to the UK.   Therefore  I
           place no weight on the account provided by  his  sister  of  the
           problems she faced prior to leaving Italy.
            51.  Subsequently and following the signing of  his  Deportation
           Order, the appellant (see his letters at I1-17 of RB)  including
           his sister sought to further mislead that he  was  sexually  and
           physically abused by a man had shared the property with them.  I
           have come to draw that conclusion because even if  his  mother's
           letter does not mention  his  claimed  experience;  his  earlier
           letter (F6) does not mention the allegation either.  He  claimed
           he had kept it a guarded secret (I4 of RB)  and  only  told  his
           victim [BA] who sought to 'blackmail' him with  the  information
           to pressure him to commit crimes.  Yet,  court  records  confirm
           the violent attack on [BA] was over territorial disputes.
            52.  Perhaps more harmful to the appellant's credibility is  his
           allegation that whilst he sought  to  share  his  'secret'  with
           someone he recently met, he never spoke about it to  his  sister
           who he regards as his 'mother' and shares a close  relationship.
           On the other, his sister  whilst  allegedly  suspecting  he  was
           being abused; had never acted on her  suspicion  even  when  his
           behaviour of criminality increased in the period  from  2007  to
           2012.  Unless he has  been  concealing  his  criminal  behaviour
           because the letters from his mother and sister speak infer he is
           of good character.
            53.  There is  no  truth  to  his  allegation  of  sexual  abuse
           because if it were true it is not credible  that  he  would  not
           have raised it as mitigating circumstances in his criminal trial
           which resulted in him serving a 12-year  imprisonment  sentence.
           And if not at his trial, he would have at least raised it  as  a
           ground to appeal against his lengthy imprisonment sentence.  His
           explanation that he felt compelled to reveal his 'secret' now is
           another yet another lie he was aware  as  of  Feb  2016  of  the
           respondent's decision to deport him'; yet he  had  delayed  such
           important fact until he was served with the  deportation  order.
           His timing to raise such allegation  only  further  damages  his
           credibility and the level he would go to avoid deportation."

9.          We note that the Judge's reference  to  the  abuse  claim  being
      relevant to  mitigation  in  the  Appellant's  criminal  trial  arises
      because he says that it was because his victim  was  blackmailing  him
      about the abuse that he attacked him.

10.         The Judge goes on to refer to a submission made by  Miss  Walker
      inviting her to revisit the findings of  the  Competent  Authority  in
      relation to the trafficking claim. We accept that the Judge  may  have
      been entitled to have regard to that decision even though the  parties
      had agreed that no  cross-examination  would  take  place  about  this
      aspect of the Appellant's account and none did take  place.   However,
      that was not the basis of the Judge's findings.

11.         We accept Miss Walker's submissions that the way  in  which  the
      Judge relied on this part of the Appellant's account has given rise to
      procedural unfairness in light of the way in which the case proceeded.
       As she pointed out, the Judge has found  that  the  account  and  her
      findings on that part of the account damaged the credibility not  only
      of the Appellant but also his sister.  She has also gone so far as  to
      say that this part of the account is  entirely  fabricated.   As  Miss
      Walker submitted, and we accept the procedural unfairness arises  from
      the failure to give the Appellant the opportunity to address the issue
      of why he did not put forward this part of his case  earlier  and  the
      reliance placed on inconsistencies in the evidence which were not  put
      to the Appellant and his sister.  The Judge  has  not  considered  why
      this account may not have been  disclosed  earlier;  that  is  clearly
      relevant when the allegation is one of sexual abuse.  Miss Walker said
      that the unfairness was material because the findings also impacted on
      the sister's evidence about the account of the family  leaving  Sierra
      Leone and their time spent in Italy  and  on  what  was  said  in  the
      Appellant's statement about the approach to sentence and on the expert
      report.

12.         That latter point is particularly important because, at [55]  of
      the Decision, the Judge "sets aside" the expert opinion in the medical
      evidence that the Appellant has been abused  and  is  vulnerable,  and
      does so solely on basis of the credibility findings which we have  set
      out above.  That in turn has affected the Judge's findings  about  the
      impact of the expert report on other aspects of the Appellant's  case.
      That is also the answer to Ms Cunha's point that, although the passage
      at [49] to [53] of  the  Decision  did  disclose  unfairness,  it  was
      nonetheless not material because that part of the  Decision  could  be
      extracted and did not impact on  the  reasoning  in  relation  to  the
      remainder of the claim  concerning  risk  on  return  which  was  also
      rejected on credibility grounds.  She drew our attention  to  [29]  to
      [48] of the Decision.  We reject that submission  however  because  if
      the Appellant's credibility had not been damaged in  relation  to  the
      abuse allegation, then the expert report would have to  be  considered
      as to its effect on the  Appellant's  evidence,  and  the  credibility
      findings in relation to the remainder of the account  might  not  have
      been reached.

13.         For those reasons, as we  indicated  at  the  hearing,  we  find
      there is a material error of law established on ground one.

Ground Two

14.         As a result of our finding on ground one,  we  can  take  ground
      two more shortly.  Miss Walker pointed out that the  findings  on  the
      claim about what happened in Italy were directly relevant to  what  is
      said at [30] of the Decision about the Appellant's  ability  to  speak
      Italian.   She  also  pointed  out  that  there  is  no  inconsistency
      regarding the expert report as to the Appellant's mental  state  which
      the Judge would have realised if she had engaged with that report.  We
      found less persuasive Miss Walker's submissions  regarding  the  other
      credibility findings, in particular what is said about the core  claim
      that the Appellant would be at risk on return to Sierra Leone  due  to
      his father's former position as a driver for important people. What is
      said at [46] of the Decision is reflective of  the  vagueness  of  the
      Appellant's account in this  regard,  including  the  answers  in  the
      asylum interview at questions [50] to [55].  The only factor which may
      be missing is reference to the possible  reason  why  his  father  was
      targeted but given the overall  lack  of  detail,  a  Judge  would  be
      entitled to make points such as those made at [46].

15.         However, as we have already observed above, we cannot accept  Ms
      Cunha's submission that the Judge's reasoning in relation to this core
      claim about what would happen on return can simply be left  intact  on
      the basis that the findings at [49] to [53] of  the  Decision  can  be
      omitted from consideration.  As we have already noted, those impact in
      particular on the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  medical  evidence  and
      whether the Appellant is vulnerable or has  other  difficulties  which
      may affect the reliability of his evidence.

16.         For those reasons, we  accept  that  ground  two  is  made  out,
      principally based on the effect of the error disclosed by ground one.

Ground Four

17.         Our initial view was  that  the  challenge  to  the  Section  72
      Certificate had not been made out.  However, having heard the  way  in
      which Miss Walker argued her case on ground one, we are satisfied that
      this ground also is made out.  This is principally because one of  the
      aspects which had to be considered is whether the Appellant  continues
      to pose a  danger  to  the  community.   We  have  already  noted  the
      relevance of what the Appellant says happened to him in Italy  to  his
      criminal offence.   It  follows  that  the  Judge's  findings  on  the
      credibility of that part of the Appellant's  account  are  capable  of
      affecting the finding  that  he  continues  to  be  a  danger  to  the
      community  and  therefore  the  consideration  of   the   Section   72
      Certificate.  We therefore accept that ground four is  also  made  out
      based on the effect of the error disclosed by ground one.

18.   In summary, we accept that there  is  an  error  of  law,  principally
      based on ground one but that this error also impacts  on  grounds  two
      and four.  We therefore set aside the Decision.  For  the  reasons  we
      have already given it is  not  appropriate  to  preserve  any  of  the
      findings.  Miss Walker asked that the appeal be remitted.  In relation
      to the appropriate forum for the re-making of the  decision,  we  have
      given careful consideration to the Joint  Practice  Statement  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal and Upper  Tribunal  concerning  the  disposal  of
      appeals in this Tribunal.  That reads as follows:


        "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
        proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
        the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
        that:-
                  a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party
                     before the First-tier Tribunal of a  fair  hearing  or
                     other opportunity for that party's case to be  put  to
                     and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
                  b) the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                     which is necessary in order for the  decision  in  the
                     appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to
                     the overriding objective in rule 2, it is  appropriate
                     to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

            Having regard to the unfairness of the earlier hearing which  we
      have identified, we are satisfied that it is appropriate to remit  the
      appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.


DECISION

We are satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  of  Judge  Lingam
promulgated on 11 December 2018 involves the making of a material  error  on
a point of law. That decision is therefore set aside.  We remit  the  appeal
to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Lingam.
 Signed          [pic] Dated: 10 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

