
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11249/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 January 2019                           |On 15 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    ASIAO
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S. Iengar, Counsel instructed by Local
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. K. Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Widdup, promulgated on  4  October  2018,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.

 2. I continue the anonymity order made in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "If it is the case that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  make  a
         clear finding on whether the appellant's father was a member of the
         Muslim Brotherhood or whether such  membership  was  known  to  the
         Egyptian authorities, the decision is, arguably, flawed.


         It is further arguable that the judge's treatment of the successful
         decision of the appellant's brother was in error."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  Following a brief discussion,  Ms.
    Pal conceded that the decision involved the making of a material  error
    of law.  I set the decision aside.

Error of Law

 5. The grounds submit that  essentially  no  clear  finding  was  made  in
    relation to the father's membership of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood,  with
    reference to the determination of the Appellant's brother's appeal.  In
    the Appellant's brother's appeal, it was accepted that the  Appellant's
    father was a member of the Muslim Brotherhood and that he was known  to
    the authorities before 2013.  In that decision, the  judge  found  that
    the Appellant's brother was at risk of persecution on return because of
    his  association  to  his  father,  a  known  member  of   the   Muslim
    Brotherhood.

 6. I have carefully considered the decision relating to the Appellant.  At
    [34] the Judge refers to the fact that the  brother's  account  of  the
    father's membership of the Muslim Brotherhood was consistent, plausible
    and consistent with the background evidence.   At  [52]  and  [53]  the
    Judge finds:

         "I note that Judge Griffith considered that the  younger  brother's
         evidence about his father was consistent internally and  consistent
         with background evidence.  I cannot reach the same conclusion about
         this Appellant.  There are inconsistencies to which I have referred
         and there would appear also to be an inconsistency with the CIG.


         I also take into account that the Appellant's account of  the  raid
         on the  house  and  his  conviction  and  sentence  is  lacking  in
         credibility.  I have considered whether his lack of credibility can
         be confined just to those elements of his claim but in the light of
         the background evidence and these inconsistences I find I cannot do
         so".


 7. With reference to these paragraphs, given that the  Appellant's  father
    is one and the same person as the  Appellant's  brother's  father,  and
    given that there is no dispute  as  to  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his father,  I  find  that  [52]  is  somewhat  confused.
    Although Judge Griffith considered the younger brother's evidence about
    his  father  to  be  consistent,  and  the  Judge  considers  that  the
    Appellant's evidence was not consistent, there is no clear  finding  as
    to whether this means that the Judge  considers  that  the  Appellant's
    father was not a member of the Muslim Brotherhood.

 8. It was accepted that there was no appeal against the  decision  in  the
    Appellant's brother's case.  Therefore there is a finding in a decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal that this Appellant's father was a member of
    the Muslim Brotherhood, and had been since 2013.  I find that, although
    the Judge has referred to the Appellant's brother's  decision,  he  has
    not given any clear  reasoned  justification  for  departing  from  the
    finding regarding the Appellant's father.

 9. Ms. Pal  submitted  that,  had  the  Judge  gone  on  to  consider  the
    Appellant's case, and the risk on return to him  as  a  result  of  his
    father's membership of the Muslim  Brotherhood,  and  had  subsequently
    come to the conclusion that he was not  at  risk,  there  would  be  no
    material error  of  law.   However  she  accepted  that  she  had  some
    difficulty in arguing that the decision should be  upheld  given  [52],
    and given the lack of reasoning for departing from the findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the Appellant's brother's appeal.  She submitted
    that the Judge appeared to infer that the Appellant was  not  at  risk,
    but I find that in all the circumstances, especially given the previous
    finding that  the  Appellant's  father  was  a  member  of  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood, an inference is far from sufficient.

10. I find that the Judge has erred in his  approach  to  the  decision  of
    Judge Griffith.  He has failed to give very good reasons or  compelling
    evidence to justify determining the issue of the  Appellant's  father's
    membership of the Muslim Brotherhood afresh,  in  accordance  with  the
    case of AA (Somalia) [2007] EWCA Civ 1040.  There is no  clear  finding
    in the decision as to whether or  not  the  Appellant's  father  was  a
    member of the  Muslim  Brotherhood  and,  consequently,  there  are  no
    findings as to the risk to the Appellant on account of this.

11. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
    law.  I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10  February
    2010, paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error  has  been  to
    deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or
    other opportunity for the party's case to be put to and  considered  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-
    finding necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, having regard  to
    the overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this
    case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

12. The appeal involves the making of a material error of law and I set the
    decision aside.

13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

14. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Widdup.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 12 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

