
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11139/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th January 2020                  |On 20th February 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'SD'
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.     Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's appeal  against
    the respondent's refusal of protection and human rights claim.




 2. The appellant, a citizen of Turkey,  sought  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom (the 'UK') on the  basis  of  feared  persecution  as  a
    result of alleged activities with the  HDP.  He  claims  to  have  been
    detained and tortured by the Turkish authorities  before  fleeing  that
    country.  The respondent refused his asylum and human rights claims  in
    a decision dated 12 September 2018, going so  far  as  to  dispute  his
    claimed Kurdish ethnicity (the 'Refusal Letter').




 3. On 12 December 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Macdonald  (the  'FtT')
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of the appellant's
    protection and human rights  claims.   The  FtT  was  critical  of  the
    appellant's credibility, both in terms  of  his  answers  given  during
    asylum interviews and in oral evidence before the FtT.


 4. The appellant appealed, on the basis  that  the  FtT  had  ignored,  in
    finding that he was not of Kurdish ethnic origin,  the  fact  that  his
    brother had been recognised as a refugee  on  the  basis  of  being  of
    Kurdish ethnic origin; the FtT had failed to make clear findings on the
    extent of the appellant's activities with the HDP; and  had  failed  to
    consider and apply objective evidence, including the risk  factors  set
    out in the Country Guidance case of  IK (Returnees  -  Records  -  IFA)
    Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.


 5. This Tribunal set aside the FtT's decision in the error of law decision
    promulgated on 7 August 2019 and which  is  annexed  to  this  remaking
    decision.  There were no preserved findings of fact.  Three  errors  in
    the FtT's decision were identified: the first was in  relation  to  the
    question of how the FtT  approached  the  appellant's  claimed  Kurdish
    ethnic origin, specifically in not considering  available  evidence  in
    relation to his brother's accepted ethnicity; second, a lack  of  clear
    findings on which events or demonstrations the appellant attended, as a
    result of which he claimed  to  have  suffered  adverse  interest;  and
    third, in not adequately analysing the risk to the appellant on return,
    in the light of objective evidence.

The screening interview

 6. The appellant claimed asylum at a screening interview  on  13  December
    2016.  During that interview, he claimed to have been  a  PKK  fighter,
    who as a result of his fighting for  the  PKK,  had  been  detained  in
    prison and tortured. He also claimed to have been involved with the HDP
    party.


The substantive asylum interview

 7. The appellant attended a substantive  asylum  interview  on  10  August
    2018. The gist of his answers was that he was  a  Turkish  national  of
    Kurdish ethnic origin, who had been arrested and ill-treated twice.  He
    had had a role in the HDP party  taking  collections  and  handing  out
    leaflets. He had first been arrested  in  February  2014;  and  on  the
    second occasion in 2015, two or three months before his arrival in  the
    UK. He entered the UK in December 2016. He  claimed  that  the  journey
    from Turkey to the UK took two or three weeks but when confronted  with
    the inconsistency in the dates, suggested that his 'mind was not in the
    right place'.  The first occasion when he was arrested, he had attended
    a Newroz celebration on 1 October 2014. He was arrested the second time
    when attending a demonstration to commemorate the 'Roboski' massacre on
    28 October 2015.


 8. The appellant asserted that he  normally  spoke  Kurdish  but  couldn't
    speak Kurdish as well as he had been able to, because it was  forbidden
    to do so in Turkey, which was why he was answering questions in Turkish
    via a translator.


The Respondent's refusal


 9. The respondent refused the appellant's application in a decision  dated
    12 September 2018.  The respondent accepted that the  appellant  was  a
    Turkish national but disputed that he was  of  Kurdish  ethnic  origin,
    regarding as inconsistent his claims to have normally  spoken  Kurdish,
    as opposed to  then  saying  that  he  only  spoke  a  few  words.  The
    respondent regarded it is reasonable to expect that if he were involved
    in a Kurdish based political party that  he  would  be  able  to  speak
    Kurdish. He had refused to have his spoken language be the  subject  of
    language analysis.


10. The respondent further regarded as inconsistent the appellant's initial
    claim to have fought with the PKK as opposed to his  role  in  the  HDP
    party taking collections, or alternatively not having  a  role  at  all
    within the party. The appellant had not referred  to  the  HDP  in  his
    screening interview and didn't know which party he was a member of.  He
    had a limited knowledge of the HDP. He said that he had  never  held  a
    gun in his life, which was inconsistent with his claim to have been PKK
    fighter.

11. The respondent also regarded as inconsistent  his  claim  that  he  had
    first been arrested on 28 February 2014 and  a  second  occasion  to  3
    months before arriving in the UK in 2015. This was in part on the basis
    of the inconsistent chronology. The  appellant  claimed  to  have  been
    tortured during the second period of detention and  failed  to  provide
    any supporting evidence. He claimed to have been arrested and  released
    on bail, subject to reporting restrictions and a  requirement  that  he
    become an  informer,  which  was  not  consistent  with  how  objective
    evidence (a Country Policy and Information Note  or  'CPIN')  described
    how suspected political activists were treated.


12. The respondent rejected the  appellant's  claim  by  reference  to  the
    Refugee Convention.  On the same facts,  the  respondent  rejected  the
    appellant's  application  under  articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR").


13. The respondent considered the appellant's private and  family  life  in
    the context of article 8 of the ECHR, by reference to paragraph  276ADE
    and appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. The appellant did not have  a
    partner or any children in the United Kingdom; had been present  for  a
    relatively brief period in the United Kingdom; and there were not  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Turkey.


The appellant's appeal


14.  The  appellant  appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  on  19
    September 2018.  In his brief grounds of appeal, he reiterated that  he
    would be at risk of persecution because of the perception that  he  had
    been involved in anti-government activities.

The Hearing

15. The proceedings were interpreted throughout with the  assistance  of  a
    Turkish interpreter, including when the appellant gave  oral  evidence.
    At the beginning of the hearing,  the  interpreter  and  the  appellant
    confirmed that they understood one another.


16. Despite no apparent difficultly in engaging  in  the  Tribunal  process
    during the hearing, I was  conscious  of,  and  considered,  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of  2010  in  relation  to  vulnerable
    witnesses.  I considered this in particular in relation  to  assertions
    around the appellant's ability to recall events and  difficulties  that
    he might have in relation to specific dates, which might  be  explained
    by his relative youth and depression, or a form of stress disorder,  as
    referred to in the expert report of Dr Hajioff.


Documents

17. The respondent provided a bundle containing the appellant's immigration
    history; the screening and  substantive  asylum  interview  notes;  the
    refusal decision and the appellant's appeal.  The appellant provided  a
    paginated and  indexed  bundle,  which  included  his  written  witness
    statement.  The appellant also gave oral  evidence,  on  which  he  was
    cross-examined.

Issues


18. I identified and agreed with the parties the issues in  the  case.  The
    appellant feared persecution form the Turkish authorities,  because  of
    actual political loyalties, namely support  for  the  HDP.   He  feared
    persecution by state actors so that internal relocation and sufficiency
    of protection were not available to him. The key issue  was  agreed  as
    credibility, although Section 8 of the 2004 Act was not  relied  on  by
    the respondent, given the appellant's relative youth when he  travelled
    across Europe.  I was asked to consider the  appellant's  rights  under
    articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR  based  on  the  same  facts.  Ms  Nnamani
    confirmed that article 8 was not  relied  on  and  in  respect  of  the
    article 3 claim, this did not relate to mental health  issues,  in  the
    sense that the appellant did not rely on a risk to his mental health on
    his return  as  breaching  article  3;  rather  he  relied  on  adverse
    attention from the Turkish authorities, for example a repetition of the
    torture and detention he claimed to have previously suffered.

Potential new evidence

19. I gave oral directions, followed up in writing on 10 January  2020,  in
    relation to written  submissions  and  any  application  to  admit  new
    evidence under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  I gave the following reasons:


    "The disputed issue of the appellant's claimed  Kurdish  ethnicity  was
    identified at the earliest stage as  one  of  the  foundations  of  his
    protection claim. The First-tier Tribunal had noted that the  appellant
    claimed that his brother had been granted protection as  a  refugee  on
    the basis of being of Kurdish ethnic origin and for reasons  associated
    with his own political opinions. The FtT had recorded at  [49]  of  his
    decision that he was" informed  that  the  brother  does  not  wish  to
    provide the appellant with any support or assistance and the fact  that
    the brother has been granted asylum is not binding on the FTT, nor does
    it inevitably leads to the conclusion that the appellant is Kurdish".


    One of the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal was that the FtT had
    failed to have regard to the fact  that  the  appellant's  brother  was
    recognised as a refugee, in circumstances where it was said that  there
    had been no dispute about the parties' relationship.


    In the re-making hearing, Ms Bassi made clear the respondent's position
    that she did not accept that the two men were brothers as  claimed  and
    the basis on which the alleged brother had been granted refugee  status
    remained unclear from the limited documents.


    In his oral  evidence  given  in  examination-in-chief,  the  appellant
    referred to his discussions with his brother about  recent  events.  In
    that context, I asked the appellant to comment on paragraph [49] of the
    FtT's decision, referred to above. The appellant gave evidence that his
    brother had never refused to help; he accepted that they were  on  good
    terms; they had never discussed whether the appellant's  brother  would
    be willing to help him with his protection claim; his brother  was  not
    informed about the previous FtT hearing, and had not  attended  because
    the appellant had not been advised by his solicitor or Counsel to bring
    any other witnesses; and the appellant had been  advised  that  no  one
    else could come into the hearing except for him, but  if  the  Tribunal
    now required his brother's attendance, the appellant would be happy  to
    bring him to a future hearing. I indicated to Ms Nnamani  that  as  the
    appellant was making  reference  to  legal  advice  while  giving  live
    evidence, I did not treat this as amounting  to  a  general  waiver  of
    legal privilege. I indicated that any application  under  Rule  15(2A),
    which she indicated she would wish to make, needed to  provide  a  full
    explanation for the  circumstances  around  the  appellant's  brother's
    evidence, or its lack of production before the  FtT,  noting  that  the
    appellant is not required to waive legal privilege.   I  discussed  and
    agreed with  the  representatives  the  above  directions.  Ms  Nnamani
    specifically indicated that she was content that we proceed with the re-
    making hearing today, with the opportunity to provide  further  written
    submissions and the opportunity to make a rule 15(2A) application."




The appellant's evidence

Written witness statement


20. The gist of the appellant's  written  witness  statement  was  that  he
    became politically active for the HDP in  2014  and  became  a  member,
    distributing leaflets and attending demonstrations and rallies as  well
    as collecting for donations.  His first detention was  on  28  February
    2014 when he was celebrating the festival of Newroz and others who were
    attending began fighting.  He was attacked by four  policemen,  and  he
    and colleagues were beaten, arrested and as he was getting into a  car,
    a policeman slammed his door shut damaging his  finger.   He  was  then
    taken to security headquarters where  he  was  placed  in  a  cell  for
    interrogation and detained for a month  and  beaten  many  times.   His
    second period of detention was in June 2015 when  he  was  attending  a
    demonstration at which an explosive device was set  off,  injuring  his
    knee.  He was arrested, dragged to a police vehicle injuring  his  knee
    further and taken to security headquarters where he  was  detained  for
    around two to three months and accused of being a  PKK  terrorist,  had
    his nose punched, his teeth broken and  he  was  only  released  if  he
    agreed to become an informer.  He reported to the police initially  but
    then fled to a friend's house where he hid for many months, then hid in
    a second location in Istanbul before fleeing Turkey in  November  2016.
    He arrived in the UK on 9 December 2016.

21. The appellant then dealt with a number  of  the  points  on  which  the
    respondent had taken issue as amounting  to  inconsistencies.   He  had
    been trying to state, when interviewed by the respondent  that  he  was
    involved in the HDP, but that the authorities had accused him of  being
    a PKK member.  He had intended to say that he did not have an  official
    role in the  party  but  used  to  take  part  in  activities  such  as
    collecting donations; that he was a member of the HDP and any answer to
    the contrary had been misunderstood.  He had referred to the HDP in his
    screening interview and he had been accused of fighting  with  the  PKK
    but was not involved with them.  He had been very  nervous  during  his
    interview and had found it difficult.  One could take part at  any  age
    in activities of the  HDP  but  only  become  a  member  aged  18.   He
    explained any difficulties over the chronology of events on  the  basis
    that he did not leave Turkey until November  2016.   In  terms  of  his
    ability to speak Kurdish he said that he spoke Kurdish, but he was  not
    fluent and therefore he did not wish to give his interview  in  Kurdish
    and had given information about Kurdish culture.


The appellant's oral evidence

22. The appellant had not attended the previous hearing as  he  had  learnt
    that his father had been killed  while  fighting  as  a  guerrilla.  On
    learning of his death, the appellant had turned his phone off as he was
    not feeling safe.  He learnt this from his brother who was in  England,
    via WhatsApp and the internet,  although  he  then  clarified  that  he
    himself did not have WhatsApp and internet messages on his  phone,  but
    that his brother had showed him the messages.  He had  not  thought  to
    produce the evidence to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  this  hearing.   He
    believed his brother had been born in 1994 but  did  not  know  exactly
    when, and he had said that the brother been born possibly  in  1995  or
    1996, in answer to question [4] of the asylum interview record  ("AIR")
    because he was afraid or had  panicked.   He  did  not  know  when  his
    brother had come to the UK.  His brother had not given evidence because
    the facts of his case were obvious, and no-one had informed  him  of  a
    need to produce his brother's evidence and he had been told  that  only
    he could attend the hearing to give evidence.   His  brother  had  been
    granted asylum for the same  reason  and  they  had  been  together  in
    Turkey.

The respondent's closing submissions

23. It would be reasonable to expect the appellant to  know  his  brother's
    date of birth, even if he didn't know when he had entered the UK.  Even
    if it were accepted that the appellant and the 'brother'  were  related
    as claimed, the issue of asserted Kurdish ethnicity had  been  disputed
    from the beginning. Even if the appellant were of Kurdish ethnicity, it
    was never suggested that purely because his Kurdish ethnicity, that the
    appellant had been put at risk so that there  still  needed  to  be  an
    individual consideration of the facts  of  the  appellant's  case.   In
    terms of his ethnicity, the appellant's evidence had been inconsistent.
     In answer to question [34] of the AIR, the appellant had said that  he
    normally spoke Kurdish; he then said that he forgot  some  letters;  he
    then went on to say that he could manage some words  in  Kurdish  ([36]
    AIR) and then only a few words.  In the space of only two questions  he
    had gone from being able to normally speak Kurdish to speaking  only  a
    few words.  He had also failed to  explain  why  he  was  unwilling  to
    undertake a language analysis test.  These were all explicable  because
    the appellant was not of Kurdish ethnic origin.  The appellant was also
    inconsistent about when he claimed to speak Kurdish.  Paragraph [47] of
    the FtT determination records the appellant as saying that he spoke  in
    Kurdish and a mixture of Kurdish and  Turkish,  whereas  the  FtT  also
    noted that he spoke with an uncle in the UK in Kurdish  but  then  said
    that this was not a regular  occurrence.   I  needed  to  consider  the
    evidence in the round which damaged his claim to be Kurdish.

24. There were further inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence  around
    political activities.  Apart from a single reference to the HDP  during
    his screening interview he had made repeated references to being a  PKK
    fighter (page [18] of the appellant's bundle)  and  confirmed  that  he
    understood the questions put to him.  At question [26] of  the  AIR  he
    then  changed  his  account,  without  any  credible  explanation.   At
    question [8] AIR he said that he had a job  in  the  HDP  and  then  at
    question [27] AIR, said he did not work for the HDP.  At question  [11]
    AIR, he said he was not a member of the HDP but at question  [29]  said
    he was.  At paragraph [58] of the decision,  the  FtT  records  him  as
    saying that he was an HDP volunteer.  He changed his account from being
    a fighter to distributing leaflets  and  he  could  not  answer  simple
    questions such as who the leader of the HDP was (question [41] AIR)  or
    when the HDP was formed (question [37] AIR).  In terms of  whether  the
    vagueness of his answers might be explained because of the  appellant's
    relative youth  and  any  vulnerability,  the  appellant  had  said  at
    question [11] AIR that he had attended the HDP offices every day and so
    it was reasonable to assume his familiarity with the HDP.

25. The expert report of Dr Hajioff did not assist the  appellant.   Whilst
    his expertise in scarring assessments was accepted at  paragraphs  [50]
    and [51], Dr Hajioff indicated that the appellant might be deliberately
    exaggerating his mental health issues to make his case stronger.

26. There were further inconsistencies in relation to the reason and  dates
    of the arrests.  At question [22] AIR he said he was first arrested  at
    Newroz celebration on 1 October and on a second occasion on 28 October,
    without specifying the years, whereas he now  asserts  that  his  first
    arrest was on 28 February 2014.   He  subsequently  asserted  that  his
    second arrest was on 10 June 2015.  The periods of detention were  also
    inconsistent. He had suggested at question 15 [AIR] that  he  had  been
    detained on the first occasion for a month, but at paragraph [9] of his
    witness statement, for more than one month.  In relation to the  second
    period of detention, he suggested at question [13] AIR that he had been
    detained for three months, whereas in his witness  statement  this  was
    two to three months.  He  was  inconsistent  about  when  he  had  left
    Turkey, claiming in the screening interview to have left on 13 December
    2016 (question [1.18]) but at question [16] AIR, he said  that  he  had
    been arrested on the second occasion in 2015;  been  detained  for  two
    months and  then  left  Turkey  soon  after  his  release.   Whilst  at
    paragraph [11] of his witness statement he had referred to  going  into
    hiding in a friend's house for many months, there  was  no  mention  of
    hiding for many months prior to his witness statement.

27. In relation to Dr Hajioff's report at paragraph [20],  Dr  Hajioff  had
    noted that there were other possible causes of the scarring.  Moreover,
    in relation to  his  inconsistencies  and  exaggerations,  the  medical
    syndrome known as 'Ganser' syndrome which was a form of  disassociation
    might be one explanation and there was  a  reference  to  him  possibly
    suffering from chronic PTSD, but we had no GP records and the appellant
    had given oral evidence that he was receiving medication from a GP  but
    had not disclosed any medical details to that  effect.   Similarly,  if
    his father had died, the appellant had provided no explanation for  why
    he had not sought to apply  for  this  evidence  to  be  adduced.   The
    reasons for the brother not attending the  previous  FtT  hearing  were
    different from those now explained.  The risk factors  in  the  country
    guidance case of IA (risk - guidelines - separatist) Turkey  CG  [2013]
    UKIAT 0034 at paragraph [46] were not relevant to the appellant  as  he
    was not Kurdish.

The appellant's closing submissions

28.  Ms Nnamani referred to the appellant's skeleton and  written  argument
    prepared for the resumed hearing on 18 November 2019 which I considered
    but do not repeat in detail.  The appellant's credibility  was  key  to
    the assessment of risk to the appellant.  We  had  a  detailed  witness
    statement for the appellant and a medical report of Dr Hajioff.  He was
    either a minor or had only recently just turned 18 during the screening
    interview and his relative youth, as well  as  the  trauma  and  mental
    health that he suffered from could explain any difficulties with  dates
    and inconsistencies.  He claimed to be vulnerable  and  suffering  from
    trauma, but this did not affect the core substance of his  claim,  that
    he had been detained twice and held for a period of many months.

29. I had to consider, by reference to the objective evidence,  whether  it
    was likely for the appellant to have been detained for leafleting.   If
    he had been aligned to the  HDP  and  attended  demonstrations  or  had
    distributed leaflets then, to the lower evidential standard,  this  was
    perfectly  plausible.   I  should  exercise  caution   in   considering
    inconsistencies during the screening interview, noting the  appellant's
    anxiety and age.  The references to the PKK in the screening  interview
    were explained by the appellant in  his  witness  statement,  where  he
    explained that he had been perceived as a PKK member but had only  been
    involved  with  the  HDP.   Whilst  Dr  Hajioff  referred  to  possible
    exaggeration, nevertheless the question was whether  the  core  of  the
    account was credible to the lower evidential  standard.   The  scarring
    assessment (page  [12]  of  the  appellant's  bundle,  paragraph  [37])
    described some of  the  scarring  as  'typical'  of  the  ill-treatment
    alleged, by reference to the well-known Istanbul Protocol.   There  had
    been an assessment of the appellant's mental health, and  at  paragraph
    [49] a reference to the appellant's memory as being  poor  as  well  as
    mental health problems at paragraph [48].  There was objective evidence
    that torture was used in  the  context  of  detention  and  Ms  Nnamani
    indicated that she would make an application dealing with the  evidence
    of the brother.


30. Noting the country guidance of IK (returnees - records  -  IFA)  Turkey
    CG, if the appellant were of Kurdish ethnicity, had leafleted on behalf
    of the HDP and had previously been detained and ill-treated as claimed,
    then by reference to paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules,  it  was
    likely that he would be questioned on return as an unsuccessful  asylum
    seeker; could not be expected to hide  his  HDP  loyalties;  and  would
    therefore be at risk of adverse treatment.  The claim  therefore  stood
    or fell with an analysis of his ethnicity, claimed HDP  activities  and
    previous alleged ill-treatment, by reference to the objective evidence,
    noting that the evidential standard was the  lower  standard  and  that
    inconsistencies or exaggerations in one area did not mean that the core
    of the account could not be credible.

The appellant's application to adduce further evidence

31. On 21 January 2020, the appellant's solicitors  sought  to  adduce  the
    witness statement of  the  appellant's  claimed  brother,  'TD'  and  a
    photocopy of his biometric residence permit. The letter asserted:


    "The above evidence confirms that [TD] is the brother of [SD] and  that
    they are Kurdish ethnicity and that TD was granted refugee status.  The
    above evidence was not previously submitted because we were  instructed
    that the appellant and his brother were not on good terms the appellant
    has confirmed following the hearing they are  not  on  good  terms  and
    apologises for the confusion. He hoped that his brother would help.  We
    contacted the appellant's brother who informed  us  that  he  was  only
    willing to provide a short witness statement and would not provide  any
    further documents or to  help  the  appellant  due  to  their  strained
    relationship. He does not wish to have any  further  contact  regarding
    the appellant. Therefore he is not willing to attend a court hearing."


32. The witness statement of TD includes an assertion that he is related to
    the appellant, as claimed, and was granted refugee status  in  December
    2018 because of his political 'problems' in Turkey. They were  both  of
    Kurdish ethnicity and TD had been accused of being a PKK terrorist even
    though he  supported  the  HDP.  The  appellant  had  suffered  similar
    problems. TD stated that his relationship with the  appellant  was  not
    good and that he did not come to 'court' as they didn't  talk  to  each
    other.  He referred to the appellant risking detention and torture.  He
    made no reference to the death of the appellant's father, to which  the
    appellant had referred in oral evidence, which the appellant claimed to
    have discussed with TD.


33. In response, the respondent objected to the application,  arguing  that
    the appellant did not make sufficiently clear why the witness statement
    had  not  been  submitted  earlier.  The  appellant  had  clearly  been
    inconsistent with regard to his relationship with TD;  claiming  first,
    before the FtT, that they were not on good terms; then claiming in oral
    evidence before the Upper Tribunal that they were on  good  terms;  and
    now asserting that they were not. The application did not  sufficiently
    explain why the appellant gave evidence at the Upper  Tribunal  hearing
    that TD had never refused help and they were on good terms. Even if the
    Upper Tribunal were minded  to  admit  the  statement,  the  respondent
    submitted that it was not independent evidence that he was  related  to
    the appellant as  claimed  and  did  not  provide  any  evidence  which
    outlined the basis of the grant of asylum.

34. Noting the principles in Ladd v Marshall [1954] EWCA Civ 1,  while  the
    appellant's account of having a poor relationship with TD remains to be
    assessed, his solicitors assert that  they  were  instructed  that  the
    appellant and his brother were not on good  terms.  I  am  prepared  to
    accept the word of those representatives, a firm of solicitors,  as  to
    what their instructions were, even if those instructions turn out to be
    untruthful or inaccurate. As a consequence, I am just about prepared to
    accept that the evidence could not have been obtained  with  reasonable
    diligence for use at the FtT hearing, although  for  the  avoidance  of
    doubt the question of whether the appellant has been  honest  with  his
    own solicitors and the FtT is a separate matter. I regard the  evidence
    as having a potentially important influence on the result of the  case,
    although the avoidance of doubt, the weight I attach to  that  evidence
    is a separate matter. On the third principle, I accept that on the face
    of it, the evidence is potentially credible, although  once  again,  it
    needs to be considered in the round with the remaining evidence.


The Law


Asylum protection

35. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that the  appellant  will
    be granted asylum if the provisions of that paragraph apply. The burden
    of proof rests on the appellant to satisfy me that he falls within  the
    definition  of  a  refugee  in  Regulation  2  of   the   Qualification
    Regulations, as read with Article 1(A) of the  Refugee  Convention.  In
    essence, the appellant has to show  that  that  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that he is outside his country of nationality  by
    reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for a  Refugee  Convention
    reason and is unable or unwilling, owing to such fear, to avail himself
    of the protection of that country.

ECHR


36. The burden of proof rests with the appellant to satisfy me  that  there
    are substantial  grounds  for  believing  that,  as  a  result  of  the
    respondent's decision, that he will be exposed to a real risk of  death
    contrary to article 2 or serious harm in breach of article 3 the  ECHR.




Findings of fact

37. I have considered all the evidence presented to me, whether I refer  to
    it specifically in these findings or not.  This case centres around the
    appellant's credibility. In making my findings, I have  considered  the
    provisions of paragraph 339 of the Immigration Rules, and in particular
    paragraphs 339K and L.  I accept Ms Nnamani's submission  that  if  the
    appellant is of Kurdish ethnic origin; has  suffered  previous  adverse
    treatment as extreme as alleged,  with  lengthy  periods  of  detention
    lasting months; was released but only on condition that he acted as  an
    informer; is returning on a one-way  travel  document;  and  could  not
    expected to lie about his loyalties to the HDP; then even if his  prior
    involvement was low-level, he would  be  at  risk  of  further  adverse
    attention amounting to persecution (see IK (returnees - records -  IFA)
    Turkey).


38. In assessing the appellant's  credibility,  I  was  conscious  that   I
    needed to consider whether it was  consistent  with  objective  country
    evidence (one of the FtT's errors of law) and I was also conscious that
    inconsistencies in the appellant's chronology might be explained by his
    relative youth and his suffering from PTSD, which  might  also  explain
    omissions in parts of the chronology, for  example  going  into  hiding
    immediately prior to leaving Turkey.  I also  needed  to  consider  the
    medical evidence of Dr Hajioff in the round, and not discount because I
    had already formed a view about the appellant's credibility.

39. I accept that elements of what were described as the appellant's 'core'
    account of arrest detention on two occasions, by  virtue  of  attending
    Newroz celebrations and commemoration of the  "Roboski  massacre"  were
    potentially consistent with wider country evidence.  In  particular,  I
    considered paragraph [2.4.14] of the  Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note ('CPIN') - Turkey: Kurdish political parties - August 2018:

    "In general, the risk faced by a member or supporter of  the  HDP  will
    depend on the person's profile and activities. When ordinary members of
    the HDP have come to the adverse attention of the authorities, this has
    generally been whilst participating in demonstrations and  rallies;  an
    ordinary member would not generally attract the  adverse  attention  of
    the authorities on account of their political beliefs. It will be up to
    a person to demonstrate that their appearance and  participation  at  a
    demonstration or rally will have brought them to the adverse  attention
    of the authorities such that they  would  experience  serious  harm  or
    persecution on return"

40. Taking his claim at its highest, the appellant has not  claimed  to  be
    more than a low-level supporter of  the  HDP,  but  if  he  did  attend
    demonstrations and was arrested as a result, the objective evidence  is
    consistent with his account of adverse treatment.  The fact of  arrests
    at such mass events is also consistent with the  CPIN  (see  paragraphs
    [2.4.6; 2.4.9; and 9.1.8]). It is unclear why post-arrest reporting  is
    said to be inconsistent with objective country-wide evidence and  I  do
    not place any particular weight on that  element  of  the  respondent's
    case.


41. I also considered Dr Hajioff's report in the round.  His  expertise  in
    assessing scars  and  psychiatry  is  unchallenged.   He  assessed  the
    appellant's scars by reference to the Istanbul protocol and noted  that
    they were 'typical' or 'consistent' with defensive injuries or abrasive
    damage. At [41], Dr Hajioff noted that there are  possible  alternative
    causes  of  the  scarring,  such  as  previous  accidental  trauma.  In
    particular, he had referred to the injury  to  the  appellant's  little
    finger on his left hand, which was well  repaired  and  treated  by  an
    expert surgeon. This contrasted with the lack of any  details  provided
    by the appellant as to the surgery, and the FtT had recorded  that  the
    appellant only claimed in oral evidence, for the first time,  that  his
    finger was only partially amputated, and that a police  officer  pulled
    the terminal phalanx completely off.  The FtT had noted, as do  I,  the
    lack of an explanation by the appellant  for  how  he  obtained  expert
    surgery, as a person persecuted by  the  state;  and  why  he  did  not
    mention something as traumatic as a police officer pulling of  part  of
    his finger with Dr Hajioff.

42. Dr Hajioff assessed the appellant as  fulfilling  the  criteria  for  a
    diagnosis of PTSD and noted his great  difficulty  in  giving  a  clear
    history, with an apparently poor memory.  Dr  Hajioff  noted  that  the
    appellant's claimed inability to carry out simple  mental  calculations
    which were typical of the condition called 'Ganser' syndrome, in  which
    people might  give  incorrect  answers  in  order  to  simulate  mental
    illness. Dr Hajioff noted at [50] to [56]:


    "[50] It is not clear whether  that  is  deliberate  malingering  or  a
    dissociative state. However, it does not match  the  general  level  of
    functioning.
    [51] it may be that most of his account  is  genuine  but  that  he  is
    deliberately exaggerating his impairment in order  to  make  this  case
    stronger.
    [56.] It  is  possible  that  he  is  exaggerating  his  disability  to
    strengthen his case."


43. I regarded Dr Hajioff's  report  as  balanced  and  willing  to  accept
    alternative causes for the appellant's scarring and the possibility  of
    the appellant feigning PTSD, but also the consistency of  the  scarring
    and the possibility of the appellant exaggerating symptoms  because  of
    disassociation.  I attached significant weight to Dr Hajioff's  report,
    as at least being potentially consistent with the appellant's claim.


44. Dr Hajioff's report also lends  some  support  to  the  view  that  the
    appellant may have difficulties in remembering a  clear  chronology  of
    events  (see [25] of  the  report),  which,  to  the  lower  evidential
    standard, just about explains the significant  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's account of the dates when he attended the two public events
    at which he claims to have been detained;  and  in  his  chronology  of
    fleeing Turkey  and  travelling  to  the  UK.  He  had  not  previously
    referred, prior to his witness statement, to an extended  period  spent
    hiding in Turkey, but once again, I regard the omission as  just  about
    explicable,  in  the  context  of  possible  PTSD.   In  summary,   the
    inconsistencies and missing events in the chronology are  not  positive
    factors in my assessment of the appellant's credibility, but there is a
    potential explanation for  them  such  that  they  do  not  damage  his
    credibility.


45. I was conscious that the claims of two periods of  detention  and  ill-
    treatment were elements of the 'core' of the claim, as described by  Ms
    Nnamani, but both also need to be considered  in  the  context  of  the
    other aspect of that core claim, namely the appellant's claim to be  of
    Kurdish ethnic origin and having participated, even at a  lower  level,
    in HDP activities.  It is in this respect that I regard the appellant's
    evidence as being so internally inconsistent, in  a  way  that  is  not
    explained by a difficulty  with  memory,  vulnerability,  or  cognitive
    function, the it significantly damages his credibility.

46. The appellant's account of his relationship with TD is inconsistent.  I
    am just about prepared to accept that appellant's lack of knowledge  of
    TD's date of birth, or when he entered the  UK,  does  not  damage  the
    appellant's credibility, as these relate to dates.  What  I  regard  as
    significantly damaging the appellant's credibility is that:

      a. Initially, his case, as presented to  the  FtT,  was  that  TD  was
         unwilling to provide the appellant with any assistance or support;
      b. when I asked him, by open  questions  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  to
         comment  on  that,  he  freely   difficultly   explained,   without
         difficulty or hesitation, that they had a  good  relationship,  and
         indeed went on to describe his recent conversations with TD; and TD
         showing him WhatsApp and other social media evidence concerning the
         death of their claimed common father, which  was  why  he  had  not
         attended a recent hearing;
      c.  the  appellant's  representatives  now  assert  that:   "We   were
         instructed that the appellant and his  brother  were  not  on  good
         terms. The appellant has confirmed following the hearing that  they
         are not on good terms and apologises for the  confusion.  He  hoped
         that his brother would help."


47. Whilst it may have been possible that the appellant's  solicitors  made
    representations at the FtT  about  TD's  unwillingness  to  assist  the
    appellant, based on inaccurate instructions, this does not explain  the
    appellant's clear oral evidence before me, that he and his brother were
    on good terms and his brother would be willing to help, when they  were
    in fact not on good terms and his brother was only willing  to  provide
    limited assistance.  The appellant's solicitors refer to "confusion." I
    regard this as instead a significant inconsistency  and  I  accept  the
    respondent's  submission  that  there  is  no  explanation   for   this
    inconsistency, other than the obvious one, which is that the  appellant
    is, regrettably, being untruthful about the nature of his  relationship
    with TD, in order to avoid TD having to provide further evidence  about
    the nature of their relationship; the appellant's  ethnic  origin;  and
    the appellant's involvement in the HDP.


48. The appellant's inconsistency about the relationship with  TD  is  only
    one aspect of the flaws in his claim to be of Kurdish ethnic origin and
    to have been an active  member  in  HDP,  but  it  is  nevertheless  an
    important one.  Noting paragraph  339L(ii),  in  assessing  whether  to
    apply the statutory "benefit of the doubt" to the appellant, I conclude
    that the appellant has  not  submitted  all  material  factors  at  his
    disposal, or provided  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  the  lack  of
    relevant material. The  biometric  residence  permit  of  TD  does  not
    establish, even to the  lower  standard,  the  nature  of  the  claimed
    relationship between the two, or the basis  on  which  TD  was  granted
    asylum, including claimed Kurdish ethnic origin. As Ms Bassi  submitted
    to me, it could have been open to TD to consent to  the  production  of
    the respondent's records of the assessment of his asylum claim; and the
    purported refusal by TD to do this on the basis of  a  breakdown  in  a
    relationship is not one which I accept. It is directly contrary to  the
    appellant's oral evidence about their good relationship.

49. Moreover, when the appellant was asked in oral evidence why he had  not
    sought to adduce evidence of the claimed death of their  father,  while
    fighting as a guerrilla, which would have been of central relevance  to
    the appellant's claimed fear of persecution, in  respect  of  which  he
    said there was social media evidence,  he  did  not  suggest  that  his
    brother would be unwilling to provide this to him,  as  indeed  TD  had
    already showed him the material; rather he had not realised the need or
    importance to produce such evidence. That is not an explanation which I
    accept as reasonable and is inconsistent with the changed position that
    the siblings were and are estranged.  There  is  also  the  absence  of
    evidence from TD, which could otherwise have been  disclosed,  relating
    to the appellant's activities with the  HDP,  which  are  only  briefly
    touched on in TD's statement.


50. The appellant's claim to be of Kurdish ethnic  origin  is  weakened  in
    three further aspects.

51. First and most importantly,  his  evidence  on  his  ability  to  speak
    Kurdish  is  materially  inconsistent.  I   accept   the   respondent's
    submission that during the course of the substantive asylum  interview,
    at AIR [34], he said that he 'normally' spoke Kurdish; and  when  asked
    about his willingness to undergo language analysis at [36] said that he
    spoke only a few words. This was also inconsistent  with  his  evidence
    before the FtT that  he  usually  spoke  Kurdish  with  his  uncle  but
    alternatively this was not a regular occurrence ([47]). In  summary,  I
    accept as possible, the proposition that those of Kurdish ethnic origin
    may, through suppression of their culture, have limited spoken Kurdish.
    What undermines the appellant's  credibility  in  this  aspect  is  his
    inconsistency about his spoken Kurdish.

52. Second, is his refusal to agree to analysis  of  his  spoken  language,
    with the inadequate explanation that he only spoke a few works  of  it,
    having previously said that he normally spoke it.  In essence,  he  was
    refusing to agree to  the  production  of  evidence  which  would  have
    resolved that inconsistency and would otherwise have been available.

53. Third, his subsequent claim to speak only limited Kurdish is undermined
    by, and undermines his claim, to have been at the  HDP  'place'  'every
    day', during his period of involvement, which was during at least  2014
    and 2015 (in answer to question [11] AIR). The  available  evidence  is
    that the HDP is a predominantly Kurdish political party (see [4.4.3  of
    the CPIN).   Even where his activity may have been low-level, the claim
    of daily contact  with  the  HDP  undermines  an  already  inconsistent
    assertion of proficiency  (or  lack  of  proficiency)  in  Kurdish.   I
    considered that the appellant's  basic  knowledge  of  Kurdish  culture
    during the substantive asylum interview is reflective of  just  that  -
    someone  with  a  basic  knowledge  of  Kurdish  culture,  but  who  is
    inexplicably inconsistent about his proficiency in Kurdish,  and  which
    undermines his claimed regular involvement in the HDP, even if  he  has
    basic knowledge of that party.

54. On the connected issue of the appellant's activism within the HDP, this
    is weakened by the lack of  detail  which  TD,  had  he  given  further
    evidence, might otherwise have provided in relation to the  appellant's
    previous activities, if the appellant's account is to be believed;  and
    as already noted, the lack of detail from the appellant or TD about the
    death of the appellant's father, in connection with Kurdish nationalist
    activities, about  which  no  additional  evidence  has  sought  to  be
    adduced, but which would have been central to the  appellant's  claimed
    fear of persecution by the time of the remaking hearing.

Conclusions


55.  I  conclude  that  the  appellant  has  not  established  his  general
    credibility for the purposes of Paragraph 339L(v)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The inconsistencies in his account go  beyond  difficulties  in
    chronology and missing events; or an absence of knowledge such  as  the
    date of birth and departure of his claimed brother, which was otherwise
    inexplicable by  his  youth  and  PTSD.    I  have  reflected  whether,
    considering Dr Hajioff's scarring  and  psychiatric  assessment,  those
    inconsistencies, when taken in the round, nevertheless  mean  that  the
    core  of  the  appellant's  account  can  be  accepted,  to  the  lower
    evidential standard. I am conscious that some elements of the  person's
    claim may be fabricated or exaggerated  whilst  other  elements  of  it
    remain accurate.


56. I conclude that the appellant's claim to be of  Kurdish  ethnic  origin
    and his HDP activism go to the core of his claim, noting  the  scarring
    and possible PTSD. He has failed, without  reasonable  explanation,  to
    adduce all the  relevant  evidence  which  would  otherwise  have  been
    readily available to him and his evidence in relation  to  the  claimed
    relationship with  TD  is  materially  inconsistent,  for  the  reasons
    already outlined.


57. The appellant has not demonstrated, to the lower  evidential  standard,
    that he is of Kurdish ethnic origin or that he was  actively  involved,
    whether as a member or any other informal capacity, with the HDP.  I do
    this, having evaluated the claim of a relationship  with  TD,  which  I
    regard as unreliable, both in respect of the nature  of  their  sibling
    relationship; the appellant's claimed ethnicity; and the basis on which
    TD was granted asylum.

58. Dr Hajioff has, in his expert report, accepted that there may be  other
    causes of the appellant's scarring; and that the PTSD symptoms,  whilst
    diagnosed,  may  be  exaggerated  or   feigned   reasons   other   than
    disassociation.  Whilst I accept that participation in mass events  may
    pose a risk to a low-level HDP members; and that an account  of  arrest
    and ill-treatment is consistent with that narrative, I  do  not  accept
    that the appellant is of Kurdish ethnic origin or was actively involved
    in the HDP; or that he attended the two events as  claimed,  which  was
    the other aspect where the FtT had not made clear findings.

59. I also conclude  that  the  appellant  has  not  shown,  to  the  lower
    evidential standard, that he was the subject of  adverse  treatment  at
    the hands of the Turkish authorities. It follows that he has  not  been
    the subject of persecution, serious harm, or threats of the  same,  for
    the purposes of Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules.  He  would  be
    returning  to  Turkey  on  a  one-way  travel  documents,  without  any
    political affiliations to the HDP, or  as  someone  of  Kurdish  ethnic
    origin. In circumstances, he would not fall  within  any  of  the  risk
    categories identified in IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey.

60. Based on the same findings, namely  the  lack  of  a  risk  of  adverse
    treatment from the Turkish authorities, I also find  that  his  removal
    would not breach his rights under articles 2 or 3 of  the  ECHR,  which
    were focused solely on such claimed adverse treatment.


Decision

61. The appellant's appeal on asylum grounds dismissed.


62. The appellant's appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.



Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

Dated:   13 February 2020



To the respondent
Fee award

The appeal has failed and so there can be no fee award.



Signed:  J Keith
         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
Dated:   13 February 2020

ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


                                    [pic]



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 July 2019                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'SD'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagionopoulou, Counsel, instructed by Howe &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which were
    given ex tempore at the end of the hearing on 22 July 2019.


Introduction

 2. This is an appeal brought by the appellant against  the  decision  (the
    'Decision')  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Macdonald,  (the   'FtT')
    promulgated on 12 December 2018, by which he dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's refusal on 12  September  2018  of  his
    protection claim.

 3. In essence, the appellant's claims involved the following  issues:  his
    adverse treatment by the Turkish authorities  as  somebody  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity and either a PKK fighter or somebody involved in the HDP as a
    result of which he had  been  arrested  twice,  detained  and  tortured
    before fleeing Turkey.  The core points taken against the appellant  by
    the respondent related to his lack of knowledge of fighting for the PKK
    during his asylum interview and his inconsistency over his role in  the
    HDP, whether handing of out of leaflets or not; his vagueness about the
    aims of the HDP; and at the age of which he claimed to have joined  the
    HDP, in contrast to objective evidence as to when the HDP permitted new
    members to join.  It was also  said  by  the  respondent  that  he  was
    inconsistent about the chronology of  when  he  claimed  to  have  been
    detained; how long his journey across Europe took and his entry to  the
    United  Kingdom  ('UK').   The  respondent  also  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claimed ethnicity, noting that the appellant did not  speak
    Kurdish; refused language analysis; and  lacked  knowledge  of  Kurdish
    culture.

The FtT's decision

 4. The  FtT  made  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  evidence  running  from
    paragraphs [37] to [74] of the Decision. the FtT was not  impressed  by
    the appellant's refusal to undergo language analysis and concluded that
    the appellant was not Kurdish as  claimed.   The  FtT  also  noted  the
    inconsistencies about what the appellant regarded as his  role  in  the
    HDP and the accounts of two arrests; including the inconsistency in the
    extent of injury on the first encounter and the lack of broken teeth as
    claimed, in contrast to a medical examination.

The Grounds of Appeal and the Grant of Permission

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially  that  the
    FtT erred in finding that the  appellant  was  not  of  Kurdish  ethnic
    origin, given that his  brother  was  recognised  as  Kurdish  and  had
    succeeded in his asylum claim before another First-tier  Tribunal;  and
    had ignored objective evidence on the difficulties  of  being  able  to
    speak Kurdish freely and the consequences of assimilation.  The FtT had
    failed to make clear findings on the  appellant's  activities  and  had
    failed to consider objective evidence on the risk of adverse attention.
     If the appellant had attended rallies, the  FtT  had  failed  to  make
    clear findings on the appellant's first claimed detention at  a  Newroz
    celebration. The FtT also failed to give adequate reasons  for  finding
    that the second period of detention did not take place; and had  failed
    to engage with the  risks  as  factors  set  out  in  the  case  of  IK
    (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312,  particularly
    when the respondent appeared to accept that the  appellant  might  have
    been  detained.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  SPJ  Buchanan  initially
    refused permission to  appeal  but  it  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chamberlain on 20 June 2019.  She regarded many  of  the
    other grounds to be  less  arguable  but  she  concluded  that  it  was
    arguable that the FtT had not made clear findings  on  the  appellant's
    activities in the HDP; whether the appellant had indeed  been  detained
    on the first occasion; and a full analysis of the risk to the appellant
    on return.  The grant of permission was not, however,  limited  in  its
    scope.

The hearing

The appellant's submissions

 6. Ms Panagionopoulou emphasised the difficulties in the FtT's finding  on
    the appellant's ethnicity,  when  the  FtT  had  been  aware  that  the
    appellant's brother with whom that it was said he  was  estranged,  had
    nevertheless been found to be a refugee.  When I  sought  clarification
    she confirmed that this had been the result of an  earlier   First-tier
    Tribunal determination and whilst there had been no adjournment request
    of the appellant's hearing, the FtT had  been  aware  of  that  earlier
    determination but had concluded that it was unnecessary to adjourn  the
    case and had therefore not had the benefit of the earlier determination
    in relation to the appellant's brother.  In essence  this  was  a  case
    therefore where the FtT had not had the benefit  of  all  the  relevant
    information.  It also may risk the FtT applying too high a standard  of
    burden when the FtT had referred to not being bound by a finding as  to
    refugee status when the fact that  the  appellant's  brother  did  have
    refugee status was not something open to the FtT to impugn,  albeit  it
    did not necessarily follow  that  the  appellant  would  himself  be  a
    refugee. Nevertheless, this  went  directly  to  the  question  of  the
    appellant's claimed Kurdish ethnic origin.

 7. The FtT had further erred in focussing on the appellant's status  as  a
    volunteer or member within the HDP, as opposed to the  activities  that
    the appellant had actually carried out.  In that regard, I was referred
    to paragraph [58] of the Decision which referred to the appellant being
    described as a volunteer.  However, referring to paragraph [57],  where
    the appellant described his activities on behalf of the HDP at  a  low-
    level, and distributing the leaflets at demonstrations,  the  focus  on
    status  ignored  risk  factors  both  in  terms  of  participation   at
    demonstrations which could, in a wider context place him at  risk;  and
    the extent of that activity.  In particular, the FtT  had  ignored  the
    objective evidence at paragraph [2.4.14] of  the  August  2018  Country
    Information Report dealing with Kurdish political opposition.  The  FtT
    had erroneously assumed that merely lower party members  or  volunteers
    would not be at risk, whereas in  fact  the  report  stated  that  when
    'ordinary' members of the HDP had come  to  the  adverse  attention  of
    authorities  this  had   generally   been   whilst   participating   in
    demonstrations and rallies.  An ordinary  member  would  not  otherwise
    attract the adverse attention of the authorities on  account  of  their
    political beliefs.  However, the FtT  ignored  the  fact  that  on  the
    appellant's account, he had claimed to have been  the  subject  of  the
    adverse attention of the authorities, which was the very point that the
    Country Information Report was addressing.  There was inadequate reason
    for finding, in that context, that the appellant was not  at  risk,  by
    virtue of his low-level status.

 8. There were also conflicting findings about the two detentions;  on  the
    one hand, it was said at  paragraph  [66]  of  the  Decision  that  the
    appellant may have been detained whilst celebrating Newroz; whereas  at
    paragraph [73] there was a finding by the FtT  that  he  had  not  been
    persuaded that the appellant had been  shown,  in  relation  either  to
    detention or a fear of persecution, that  his  appeal  should  succeed.
    The reason for the conclusion that his protection claim did not succeed
    was insufficiently explained.

 9. There was a further discrepancy in relation to  the  second  period  of
    detention, at  paragraph  [70]  of  the  Decision.   The  FtT  was  not
    persuaded that the appellant was assaulted, as claimed, whilst detained
    on the second occasion.  This left open the  possible  conclusion  that
    the FtT may have found that the appellant was in fact detained but that
    in fact he had not been  assaulted  as  claimed.   This  contrasted  to
    paragraph [72] where the FtT had found that the detention did not  take
    place.

10. In any event, while at paragraph [77], while the FtT referred to having
    carefully considered the authority of IK and the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant did not face a real risk on return, noting  that  he  was  at
    best a low-level supporter of the  HDP  who  had  been  detained,  this
    ignored the fact that his brother had been granted refugee status;  the
    appellant would be returned as an undocumented returnee and seen  as  a
    failed asylum seeker. In essence, the assessment of the IK risk factors
    was inadequate.

The respondent's submissions

11.  Mr Tarlow, in brief submissions, invited  me  to  consider,  as  Judge
    Buchanan had done when refusing permission in the first instance,  that
    the appeal was merely a disagreement with the FtT's findings.

Decision on the Error of Law

12. I conclude that there were material errors of law in the  Decision,  in
    three specific aspects.  The first was in relation to the  question  of
    how the FtT approached the appellant's claimed Kurdish  ethnic  origin.
    Paragraph [49] of the Decision records that the appellant's brother was
    granted asylum on 21 June 2018, albeit that they were now estranged  so
    that the brother had not assisted the appellant in his appeal.  The FtT
    noted that the fact that the brother had been granted  asylum  was  not
    binding on him nor does it inevitably lead to the conclusion  that  the
    appellant is Kurdish.  The  reference  to  an  'inevitable  conclusion'
    ignores the lower standard of proof, which the FtT should have  adopted
    when considering all aspects of the appeal, including  the  appellant's
    ethnicity.  The question of whether the appellant  is  Kurdish  or  not
    must also inform any assessment of the remainder of his claim.  In  not
    considering more fully the earlier  First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    relating to the appellant's brother, whilst of course the authority  of
    Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702 does not strictly apply to such  a
    case,  the FtT failed to consider potentially relevant evidence and  to
    assess whether that might have a bearing  on  the  appellant's  claimed
    Kurdish ethnic origin,  which  in  the  context  of  objective  country
    evidence on the effects of assimilation, might have addressed the FtT's
    concerns about the appellant's refusal to undertake a language analysis
    test.  The analysis of the claimed ethnic  origin  is  central  to  the
    appellant's protection appeal.   The  FtT's  finding  that  he  is  not
    Kurdish also sits uneasily with apparent findings  that  the  appellant
    participated in Newroz celebrations.

13. Second, I accept  the  appellant's  submission  that  the  Decision  is
    unclear on whether the appellant attended either the  first  or  second
    event, at both of which he claims to have suffered  adverse  attention.
    By way of example, on the one hand, there is a reference  to  paragraph
    [70] to the FtT not accepting that he was assaulted while detained,  on
    the second occasion, which leaves the  implication  that  he  had  been
    detained, whilst at paragraph [72], the FtT did not accept the fact  of
    detention on the second occasion.   At  paragraph  [77]  there  is  the
    suggestion that the appellant may have attended the Newroz celebrations
    and then been detained.   In relation to both events, I concluded  that
    the Decision required clarity on the findings both in  respect  of  the
    first and the second attendances and  detentions;  and  that  this  was
    material, noting the Country Information Report of August 2018 where it
    is said that ordinary members of the  HDP  have  come  to  the  adverse
    attention  of  authorities  and  this   had   generally   been   whilst
    participating in demonstrations and rallies.  This in turn  meant  that
    if the FtT were persuaded that the appellant had attended  the  events,
    by reference to  objective  evidence,  he  may,  even  as  a  low-level
    supporter, have faced adverse attention.

14. Third, I conclude that the Decision did  not  adequately  consider  the
    risk to the appellant on  his  return,  considering  the  risk  factors
    identified in IK.  In  the  context  of  the  appellant  returning  and
    possibly being perceived as a failed asylum seeker and the  subject  of
    further questioning (as to which  I  make  no  finding),  the  lack  of
    clarity on whether the appellant was previously detained  is  material.
    This is all the more so in the context of the appellant's brother being
    granted asylum; and the error identified in relation to the finding  on
    Kurdish ethnicity.

Disposal

15. All of the potentially relevant evidence is  documented  (such  as  the
    previous First-tier Tribunal determination, as well  as  the  objective
    evidence, including that of a country expert). The issues are  discrete
    and limited and there is unlikely to be a need for further evidence. In
    the circumstances, I regarded it as appropriate for the Upper  Tribunal
    to remake the Decision, rather than remit the appeal back to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In remaking the Decision, none of  the  FtT's  findings
    are preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.  The Upper Tribunal shall remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  30 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

While I have allowed the appeal, I considered that any  decision  on  a  fee
award should await the outcome of the remaking of the decision,  so  that  a
decision on the fee award is reserved.

Signed J Keith                  Date:  30 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
