
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11407/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 March 2020                               |On 18 May 2020                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                    T. V.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.   Breach  of
this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.   We  make  this  order
because the  appellant  is  an  asylum  seeker  and  therefore  entitled  to
privacy.

This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
the appeal of the appellant against a  decision  of  the  respondent  on  15
November 2019 refusing him asylum or humanitarian protection.

In broad terms it is the appellant's case  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision is riddled with error and has to  be  set  aside.   The  respondent
accepts that there is one mistake of fact but  contends  that  the  decision
taken as a whole is lawful and the appellant is not entitled to any relief.

We begin by considering exactly what the First-tier Tribunal did.

The  judge  began  by  setting  out,  correctly,  the  appellant's  personal
history.  The judge noted that the appellant was born in 1995  and  he  said
that he left Sri Lanka and travelled to Malaysia in February 2016  and  then
to Austria via the Maldives and Switzerland.  He  was  arrested  in  Austria
and claimed asylum and the application was  unsuccessful.   His  agent  then
took him to Switzerland where he claimed asylum  and  that  application  was
unsuccessful in March 2016.  He  then  travelled  to  France  where  he  was
arrested and detained.  He was released in November 2016  and  travelled  to
Dubai.  He was arrested when he arrived in Dubai because he had  arrived  on
false documents and he was returned to Sri Lanka on 21 November 2016.

It is the appellant's case that he stayed with his aunt  in  Sri  Lanka  and
left for a second time in June 2017, travelling  to  Malaysia  and  then  an
unknown country in Europe in July 2017.   He  says  he  entered  the  United
Kingdom clandestinely in the back of a lorry on 20 July  2017.   He  claimed
asylum on 2 August 2017 and inquiries revealed that he  had  claimed  asylum
in Austria and Switzerland.  He was interviewed  about  his  application  in
March 2019.

Having given necessary and appropriate self-directions on the law the  judge
outlined the respondent's case at paragraph 7 of her  decision.   The  judge
said the respondent recognised that if the appellant was  credible  then  he
had the basis of a sound claim for asylum because of his  imputed  political
opinion.

The appellant said that his brother was "missing" having been taken  by  the
army but his account of his brother being taken was full  of  inconsistency.
The appellant first said that his brother was taken in 2007 and then  stated
it was in 2011 and then said that his  brother  was  abducted,  rather  than
taken in 2010.  On one telling of his story  the  appellant  said  that  his
father took his brother to the army  to  make  inquiries.   In  the  judge's
summary of the respondent's case, she stated that this "was  not  consistent
with his claim that he was at risk due to  his  uncle's  membership  of  the
LTTE."

According to the judge, the respondent complained that  the  appellant  said
that he had a conversation with an army official  at  a  road  junction  who
told him that his father had been beaten and would die.  That  is  grim  but
it was the appellant's case that that conversation took place  in  2010  but
his father was said to have been beaten in 2007.

The appellant stated  that  he  went  to  a  Heroes'  Day  event  at  Jaffna
University in November 2015 and did not have any problems  on  the  day  but
the army visited his house the next day.  In another telling  of  the  story
he said he attended a protest in October 2015 and the army came looking  for
him the following day.  The respondent did not  consider  it  credible  that
the army waited until the following day on  either  version  of  the  story,
rather than arresting him at the event.

Confusingly the appellant claimed that his uncle died in 2006 and also  that
he did not know his uncle's whereabouts.  He did not know his  uncle's  rank
in the LTTE.

It was the appellant's case that he  had  been  abducted  by  plain  clothes
officials on 27 November 2015, that being the day he said he  attended  the
Heroes' Day event at  Jaffna  University  and  was  held  for  a  month  and
tortured and questioned about his uncle and  brother.   The  respondent  did
not consider it credible that the appellant would  be  of  interest  to  the
Authorities in 2015 because of the actions of  his  uncle  or  brother  many
years before.  His uncle had been dead for nine years at that point.

It was the appellant's case that he had been tortured and he supported  that
claim with injuries, scars and marks to his  body,  particularly  the  upper
back but the respondent considered the  marks  could  have  been  caused  by
other factors and that they did not confirm his claim to have been  tortured
as described.

It was the appellant's case that he had been taken to his uncle's  house  on
release and he watched films until he left Sri Lanka in  February  2016  but
the respondent did not believe that he could have done that without  seeking
medical attention if he had in fact been injured as he claimed.

The respondent did not find it plausible that the appellant's uncle and  his
friend would be able to bribe the army and the airport  officials.   It  was
also the appellant's case  that  having  claimed  asylum  unsuccessfully  in
Austria and Switzerland he was returned to Sri Lanka in  November  2016  and
he remained there until June 2017 without issue.   The  respondent  regarded
this as inconsistent with his claim to be  at  risk  in  the  event  of  his
return to Sri Lanka.

The respondent did not believe that the appellant had told the  truth  about
his experiences and did not accept he was in fear of  the  army  or  of  the
EPDP.  The respondent applied  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
(Treatment of Claimants)  Act  2004  which,  according  to  the  respondent,
required a finding that the appellant's credibility had been damaged.

According to the respondent, the facts established by the appellant did  not
put him within the category of people recognised in GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  [2013]
UKUT 319 as being in need of protection.  This was not an "Article  8"  case
or where exceptional circumstances were said to entitle  him  to  remain  in
the United Kingdom.

The appellant did not attend the hearing.  It was his case that he  was  not
able to attend because he  was  unwell  and  this  claim  was  supported  by
psychiatric evidence.  The appellant had indicated  through  his  solicitors
that he was content for the matter to be determined in his absence which  is
what happened.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge then set out  a  summary  of  the  appellant's
case. The appellant identifies himself as a Tamil  from  Sri  Lanka  and  in
addition to using the present name and a date of birth, said to be in  1995,
he has also used a different name and a different date of birth said  to  be
in 1996.  He said he has contact with his  family.   He  claimed  his  older
brother was abducted in 2010 and his own problems started in  November  2015
when he attended a Heroes' Day event.

He said that in 2007 the army was involved in a  "roundup"  and  his  father
took the appellant's older brother to an army base for an  inquiry  and  the
brother never returned.  But he had given different  accounts  stating  that
the event had happened in 2011 or alternatively 2010  and  that  his  father
was beaten when he went to inquire about his brother in 2010.

The appellant attended a Heroes' Day event at Jaffna University in  November
2015.  Over 200 people attended the event which  was  to  honour  those  who
were missing.  The army was present and watching but took  no  part  on  the
day but the next day came to the appellant's home seeking him.   However  he
gave a different account when he  said  that  he  was  "wanted"  because  he
attended an event in October 2015 when a female MP  attended  and  the  army
were observing.  He also claimed that on the day of the November  event,  27
November 2015, the army visited his home and had kicked his mother.

The appellant said that on 28 November 2015 he was taken  from  his  bicycle
and blindfolded, his hands were tied and he was asked if he had  been  to  a
Heroes' Day event.

He said that he was then taken to an army  camp  at  Palaly  and  questioned
about his uncle and brother.

He said he was tortured three times a day and accused of  trying  to  revive
the LTTE.  He was then beaten on the stomach and back  and  his  feet  burnt
with cigarettes.  He said that something akin to a skewer was inserted  into
his penis and he was burnt on his back with a heated knife.   He  said  that
he was released on 30  December  2015  when  his  paternal  uncle  paid  the
officers.  He did  not  receive  medical  treatment  or  medication  but  on
release he was taken to Chilaw and from there to the airport by a friend  of
his uncle.  Airport officials were bribed and he was allowed  to  travel  to
Malaysia on 13 February 2016.

It was the appellant's case he had been involved with Tamil  politics  since
he was aged 18 when he helped the Tamil  Political  Party  arrange  meetings
and show people how to vote.  His brother was not a member of the  LTTE  but
went out with his uncle.  The appellant said he feared the army  as  he  had
been forbidden to leave the country.  He  said  that  his  brother  had  not
disappeared and he intended to attend a protest in the United  Kingdom  (see
the end of paragraph 9 of the Decision and Reasons; the meaning may  not  be
clear).

The judge then summarised  the  appellant's  own  account  for  the  hearing
provided in a witness statement and from  scarring  reports,  a  psychiatric
report and medical reports, as well as his TGTE identity  card,  web  clips,
photographs and background information.  The judge summarised the  statement
where the appellant referred to his mental health conditions  and  submitted
psychiatric reports and the  difficulties  he  had  with  concentrating  and
focusing.

The appellant said he had been attending a  pro-Tamil  and  anti-Sri  Lankan
Government demonstration in the United Kingdom.  The appellant said that  he
came from an LTTE family and had the problems as stated  in  his  interview.
He had been constantly questioned and intimidated.  He came to  the  adverse
attention of the Authorities when he attended a  Heroes'  Day  event  on  28
November 2015 after which he was arrested and ill-treated.  He said  he  was
released after he signed a blank sheet of paper and on payment of  a  bribe.
The airport officials were also bribed so he could leave the country.   When
he was returned to Sri Lanka in May 2017 he was detained  for  25  days  but
was able to be released with the help of the EPDP.

The appellant recognised that he had given  confusing  accounts  because  of
differences in dates.  He attributed that to  mental  ill-health.   He  said
his brother was abducted in 2010.  He did not know why he was  not  arrested
at Heroes' Day but only the day after and he feared the army  and  the  EPDP
and did not see why the fact that the Austrian  and  Swiss  Authorities  had
not accepted his claim should determine the outcome of  his  application  in
the United Kingdom.

It was the respondent's case before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  put  by
the  Presenting  Officer,  that  the  amount  of  torture  claimed  was  not
consistent with the scarring report.  The appellant had also claimed  asylum
in two other countries where he  had  been  unsuccessful  and  he  had  been
returned from Dubai and was able to enter and leave Sri Lanka.  It was  said
that he  had  a  limited  profile  in  Sri  Lanka.   His  modest  sur  place
activities would not create a risk.

The appellant's case to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  that  he  came
within the category of people identified in  headnote  4  of  GJ,  namely  a
person who had previously been detained by the Authorities.

Importantly it was submitted that the  immigration  history  as  recited  in
paragraph 44 of the refusal letter was just  wrong  and  not  in  accordance
with the answers the appellant had given to  questions  238  and  242.   The
judge  was  outlining  the  case  but  we  note  in  parenthesis  that   the
appellant's recorded answer to question 239, "Is there  anything  you  would
like to add or clarify?" is "When I went back in May 2017 I was  caught  and
that was a factor to motivate me to get out of the  country.  Some  kind  of
torture I went through, I am unable to speak about  it.  Now  I  can't  even
cry, all those years I cried now no tears come  out  of  my  eyes.  Everyone
sleeps peacefully  now  I  have  got  to  a  stage  where  I  have  to  take
tables(sic). They put a wooden piece into my penis and I  have  difficulties
urinating".

Paragraph 44 of the respondent's letter said that the appellant returned  to
Sri Lanka from 2016 to 2017 without difficulty but he had said that  he  had
been detained and tortured.  Further the appellant had given details of  the
physical abuse involved.  He was detained  and  abused  on  return  and  the
letter was just wrong to say otherwise.

The appellant's  bundle  included  a  scarring  report  that  supported  his
account.  The scars on the upper back  were  "highly  consistent"  with  the
appellant's account.  Other scars were  similarly  "highly  consistent"  and
the scars around the ankle were "typical".

Clearly the scars had got there somehow and  it  was  the  appellant's  case
that he had not inflicted them himself.

The appellant was not fit to give evidence, that claim was  supported  by  a
psychiatrist.  He had a severe Depressive Episode and Post-Traumatic  Stress
Disorder.  He did have family members who were active with the LTTE and  his
brother had disappeared.  His fingerprints had been taken  and  it  was  his
case that he would be detained  on  return.   He  was  vulnerable  and  that
increased the chances of his  being  persecuted  because  any  ill-treatment
would bear heavily with him.

It was the respondent's  case  that  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
released on payment of a bribe indicated that he was of no real interest  to
the authorities and he would be unlikely to be re-detained.

Specifically, the claim that he had difficulty urinating was  not  supported
by any medical evidence.

Starting at paragraph 14, the First-tier Tribunal began its analysis of  the
evidence under the  heading  "Findings  and  Decisions"  with  reference  to
Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act
2004.  This is the Section which deems certain conduct to be  discreditable.
 It is the appellant's case that he has been to  Austria  where  he  claimed
asylum  unsuccessfully  and  to  Switzerland   where   he   claimed   asylum
unsuccessfully and to France where he did not  claim  asylum  at  all,  even
though he had dealings with the Authorities, because  he  was  arrested  and
detained.

The judge found that the appellant's failure  to  claim  asylum  in  another
safe country and his willingness to use false documents to travel  (this  is
a reference to the trip to Dubai) diminishes his credibility.

The judge noted with regret that the Tribunal had not been told the  reasons
for the states of Austria and Switzerland refusing asylum.   It  would  have
been interesting to know what the appellant had said when he  pursued  those
claims and why they were not accepted.  However all that is  known  is  that
two unsuccessful claims were made.  Nevertheless the judge found that  these
refusals in themselves undermine the veracity of the claim.

At paragraph 15 the judge considered further if the appellant's  credibility
been damaged.

The judge was concerned that  there  had  been  different  accounts  of  the
events leading to his arrest and torture during  his  return  to  Sri  Lanka
between November 2016 and July 2017.  Initially the  appellant  had  claimed
only to have been tortured and detained in 2015.   He  stated  that  he  was
arrested and  fingerprinted  on  arrival  in  2016.   In  the  later  asylum
interview he said that he was arrested on arrival in  November  2016  and  a
friend got him out in December 2016.  No explanation  was  offered  for  how
his friend arranged his release.  He then claimed for the  first  time  that
he had been arrested and tortured in  May  2017  following  which  the  EPDP
arranged for his release.  There is nothing in  the  psychiatric  report  to
suggest that he told the psychiatrist he had been tortured.  He did  mention
being detained in 2017 but not being tortured.  The scarring  report  refers
to a complaint of torture in 2015 and to his being rearrested  in  May  2017
but makes no mention  of  torture  in  May  2017.   Although  the  appellant
referred in his statement to being arrested in May 2017 he had not  referred
to being rearrested on re-entry to Sri Lanka as claimed.

The judge found that the appellant was  able  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka  in
November 2016 and while he may have been stopped at the airport, and he  did
not have a proper passport and was returned as a prisoner,  the  authorities
were content for him to be released after  the  intervention  of  a  friend.
The judge found this highly indicative of the appellant not  being  "wanted"
by the Authorities.  The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was
tortured in detention in 2017.  The judge reached  that  conclusion  because
of inconsistencies in the evidence  which  he  found  damaging.   The  judge
clearly found it significant that there was no medical evidence  of  urinary
issues which surprised him given the appellant's claim to  have  suffered  a
skewer being inserted into his penis.

At paragraph 17 the judge looked at the psychiatric report which  says  that
the appellant was suffering mental health issues so that he could  not  give
evidence.  The judge regarded this as inconsistent with the GP  notes  which
record the appellant was conversing  well,  cheerful  and  without  suicidal
thoughts.   Although  the  appellant  attended  the  GP  in  November   2019
reporting a worsening depression he was found  to  be  coherent  with  clear
speech and no thoughts of self-harm or suicide  and  showing  good  insight.
He was referred to Mental Health Services in  December  2019,  just  a  week
before the hearing where he appeared to be well presented and engaged.

The judge found that the appellant was  in  a  relatively  stable  condition
until a few weeks before the hearing.  He told his GP that he had stayed  in
his room all day but that did not  fit  with  his  claim  to  have  attended
demonstrations in central London which he supported by photographs.

The judge found the credibility of the central claim to have  been  tortured
when he  was  arrested  to  be  damaged  by  his  inconsistent  account  and
vagueness about dates.  By way of example the  judge  pointed  out  that  he
stated in answer to question 86 of the interview that his  problems  started
in 2010 when the army came and wanted to take his brother but from  question
87 he said that that happened in 2007 and at 95 that it  happened  in  2011.
By the time he got to questions 107 and 108 he  said  the  incident  was  in
October 2010 as he had previously claimed.   The  appellant  had  stated  he
attended Heroes' Day in October 2015, then changed that  to  November  2015,
then said he was arrested on 28 November 2015.

The appellant had submitted no supporting  evidence  that  his  family  were
involved in the LTTE or that his brother  had  disappeared.   The  appellant
was unclear if his brother was dead or disappeared but had said that he  was
dead.  He did not claim medical attention even though he said  that  he  was
injured.

The judge  noted  that  although  the  scars  were  in  some  cases  "highly
consistent" with the account, the scars cannot be dated and the judge  found
that the scars were not  as  extensive  as  the  appellant's  account  would
suggest.  The judge said at paragraph 18:  "given  the  several  credibility
issues, I do not consider that the scars are determinative."

The judge then went on to note  that  the  appellant  claimed  that  he  was
released on a bribe in 2016 and did not say how the sums needed to  pay  the
bribes were raised or what contact  arrangements  were  made.   However  the
judge recognised the appellant "clearly has mental health issues"  but  said
that the diagnosis of PTSD is based on the  appellant's  account  which  the
judge did not accept.  The judge explained  "as  I  have  not  accepted  the
appellant's account, whilst I accept the  diagnosis  I  do  not  accept  the
claimed cause."

Dealing  with  sur  place  activities  the  judge  noted  that  the  witness
statement did not provide details of the activities and  the  only  evidence
of sur place activities were photographs in  the  appellant's  bundle  which
were claimed to be the appellant attending a demonstration.   The  appellant
did not attend the hearing and the judge said "so I am  unable  to  identify
the appellant as being the claimed person in the photograph".

In any event the photographs were said to  be  of  a  demonstration  outside
Westminster Magistrates' Court  relating  to  the  trial  of  a  Sri  Lankan
diplomat and the judge said that  even  if  the  appellant  did  attend  the
demonstration "it was not outside the Sri Lankan Embassy where there may  be
surveillance, and the appellant has not submitted  evidence  that  attendees
at the demonstration would be known to the Sri Lankan Authorities."

The judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

Permission to appeal was given by a First-tier Tribunal Judge who said:

  "It is correct to observe that the judge does rehearse  the  evidence  at
  some  length,  detailed  a  number  of   inconsistencies   and   apparent
  contradictions.  I am also mindful that reasons for  decisions  can  (and
  often should) be brief, and cannot be expected to deal with  every  point
  raised.  However, it is arguable that in the analysis of the evidence the
  judge does not make  sufficiently  adequate  and  clear  findings  as  to
  important aspects of the case, including  the  fact  and  extent  of  the
  torture claimed to  have  taken  place  in  2015.   Given  the  potential
  significance of this matter it is arguable that an error of law has  been
  made.  It is therefore unnecessary to  consider  all  the  other  grounds
  raised at this stage in detail, but it does seem to  me  that  they  also
  raise arguable errors of law."

The grounds supporting the application were drawn in emphatic terms by  Miss
Charlotte Bayati of Counsel and relied  on  before  us.   We  consider  them
below.

The first ground in paragraph 3 contends that the judge,  having  identified
matters which "she considered cast doubt on  the  Applicant's  account"  did
not follow through and decide if in fact he had been detained  and  tortured
in 2015, 2016 or 2017.  The  ground  was  particularly  concerned  that  the
judge failed to state whether he accepted or rejected the appellant's  claim
of being detained in 2015 for a month and  ill-treated  following  detention
at a demonstration and again failed to make a  finding  on  whether  he  was
detained for a month on his return to Sri Lanka.  The judge did accept  that
the appellant was arrested and managed to arrange for his  release  but  not
the length of the detention.  The judge also failed to make any findings  on
whether the appellant was detained in May 2017 as claimed,  merely  that  he
was not satisfied that the appellant was tortured during that detention.

Next the grounds complain that there were errors of fact.

First it is said the judge had found the appellant  had  only  said  in  his
screening interview that he was arrested and  fingerprinted  on  arrival  at
the airport in 2016 whereas in fact, according  to  the  appellant,  he  had
stated clearly in answer to question  5.6  that  he  had  been  detained  in
November 2015 and again when he was returned to Dubai at  the  airport  when
he was detained for a month before being released.  It is, according to  the
grounds, wrong for the judge  to  say  that  the  appellant  only  mentioned
arrest and fingerprinting on return to Sri Lanka.

Next it is said that the judge erred  in  stating  that  the  psychiatrist's
report did not show that the appellant had claimed to be tortured  in  2017.
It did.  The psychiatrist had referred expressly to  the  appellant's  claim
to have been detained in 2015, 2016 and 2017.

It is also said the judge failed to appreciate that the appellant  had  said
that a skewer had been inserted into his penis when he  was  interviewed  at
the  screening  and  substantive  stage  and  this  method  of  torture  was
acknowledged in the report of Dr Martin and Dr Dhumad.

It is then said that  the  judge  failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the
evidence of Dr Martin. Dr Martin was assessing scars that  were  claimed  to
have been caused during November 2015 detention.  Given the function of  the
report it is unremarkable, according to the grounds,  that  no  mention  was
made of torture in 2017 because that alleged torture did not  give  rise  to
the points that Dr Martin was asked to consider.

The grounds then turn attention on  the  analysis  of  the  evidence  of  Dr
Martin.  This was said  to  be  wrong.   It  is  said  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge erred in  failing  to  regard  the  extent  of  the  injuries
identified by Dr Martin and further erred in saying  that  the  scarring  is
not as extensive as the applicant's account suggested.

Dr Martin identified three different areas of scarring, the  first  being  a
scar seven centimetres long  on  the  appellant's  back  which  was  "highly
consistent" with being burnt with a heated iron rod, the second area was  an
area of "several scars spread on  different  parts  of  the  back  and  left
shoulders" and this was "highly consistent" with being beaten and the  third
area being numerous scars on both ankles which were recognised as  "typical"
of burns caused by torture typically  with  cigarettes  which  is  what  the
appellant had said had happened  to  him.   According  to  the  grounds  the
doctor had concluded overall that the appellant's  scars  were  "typical  of
torture as claimed" and the grounds describe this  as  significant  evidence
supporting his claim to have  been  tortured.   The  grounds  continue  that
whilst the evidence may not be determinative it was weighty and  should  not
be discounted lightly.

The grounds also say that the judge  wrongly  held  out  himself  to  be  an
expert in stating the scarring was not as extensive as the torture  claimed.
 It was a remark that could not be substantiated.  There was clear  evidence
of scarring and it  should  not  be  discarded  because  of  the  subjective
expectations of a person without appropriate qualifications.

The judge was also said to have erred when  dealing  with  alleged  diaspora
activity.

The judge said that because the appellant had not attended  the  hearing  he
could not identify  the  appellant  as  claimed  in  the  photographs.   The
grounds assert that the judge was in a position to identify  the  appellant.
The judge had the benefit of what is  described  as  "a  very  clear  recent
photograph in Dr Martin's report and a clear photograph of the appellant  on
his Tamil Eelam card".  Those things according to  the  grounds  were  quite
good enough to show that the appellant had attended a rally.

The grounds disagree that the judge was entitled to conclude  there  was  no
evidence to show that attendees at  the  demonstration  outside  Westminster
Magistrates' Court would be known  to  the  Sri  Lankan  Authorities.   News
reports showed that  officials  of  the  Sri  Lankan  High  Commission  were
present at the hearing and were criticised for  taking  photographs  in  the
Magistrates' Court.  Perhaps more importantly the grounds contend  that  the
report was on a news report that was accessible publicly.

It was said that the learning of the Tribunal in GJ (Sri Lanka)  shows  that
the Sri Lankan intelligence forces are sufficiently  sophisticated  to  know
who attends demonstrations in the United Kingdom and that should  have  been
recognised.

It is said the judge had no regard to the appellant's  claim,  supported  by
documents in his bundle, to be a volunteer member of the TGTE,  and  had  an
identity  card  showing  his  membership  of  the  organisation.   It  is  a
proscribed organisation and the appellant is  liable  to  prosecution  as  a
volunteer member.  This point was not considered.

The grounds maintain that the appellant's  case  showed  that  he  at  least
risked being perceived as someone who was a destabilising influence  on  the
integrity of Sri Lanka.  In short the  grounds  contend  the  appeal  should
have been allowed.

These and other points were taken in the oral submissions.

Mr Clarke was not cowed.

He accepted, as is plainly the case, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
made mistakes of fact as alleged in the grounds.  The  judge  was  wrong  to
say the appellant had only claimed at his screening interview  that  he  was
arrested and fingerprinted on arrival at the airport in 2016.  He said  that
he had been detained in November 2015 and that he was detained for  a  month
when he was returned from Dubai.

We cannot sweep away this error in the way the Mr Clarke  urged.  Whilst  it
may be that  not  very  much  turns  on  when  the  appellant  was  in  fact
fingerprinted that is not the point.  What matters is the judge has  used  a
peripheral matter as an indicator that the appellant is dishonest.  That  is
unobjectionable in itself although always dangerous with peripheral  matters
because they must not be over emphasised  but  the  judge  has  used  a  bad
point.  The judge was also wrong to say that the appellant had not told  his
psychiatrist that he had been tortured in 2017 when he had.  The  judge  was
also wrong to criticise the absence of matters in Dr  Martin's  report  that
were not part of Dr Martin's deliberations.

We also agree that the judge clearly was  in  a  position  to  identify  the
appellant in the pictures taken outside the Magistrates' Court by  comparing
the image with the clear photograph of the appellant in the medical  report.
We could and are satisfied that it was probably the same person.

We have reflected on this and Mr  Clarke's  determined  arguments  that  the
adverse  credibility  finding  was  open  to  the  judge  and  was  reasoned
adequately.  On  any  version  of  events  there  are  difficulties  in  the
appellant's case.  It is part of his case that he is  a  bad  historian  and
whilst medical evidence might absolve him from any kind of  moral  blame  it
does not make it any easier to prove his case and an account certainly  does
not have to be believed because it is told inconsistently by  a  person  who
has been traumatised.

Further  there  is  clearly  a  statutory  requirement  to  find  that   the
appellant's credibility has been damaged and the appellant's willingness  to
attempt to deceive the  authorities  in  Dubai  by  travelling  on  a  false
passport is clearly discreditable behaviour.

Nevertheless we are told  frequently  that  credibility  findings  are  done
properly when they are based on an overall "in  the  round"  evaluation  and
once the thoroughly bad point has entered the mix it  becomes  difficult  to
say that any of the points are untainted.

Many more points were taken before us but we are  not  satisfied  with  this
decision.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made  mistakes  that  we  find  are
important and we set aside the decision.

Given that the  appellant  did  not  give  evidence  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal we see no reason not to move seamlessly to  making  a  decision  on
the evidence that is before us.  We had  clear  that  ALL  disposal  options
were open to us and there was no application to adduce more evidence.

In reaching this  conclusion  we  have  said  very  little  about  Counsel's
arguments before us.  This is because, for the reasons indicated  above,  we
see no need to particularise them.  We have considered them and  found  them
helpful.

We remind ourselves that the appellant must prove his case but the  standard
of proof is low.  It is sufficient if he establishes a "real risk" based  on
an evaluation of the evidence as a whole that  returning  him  would  expose
him to a risk of persecution or  treatment  contrary  to  his  rights  under
Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The immigration history is set  out  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  bundle
prepared for the Tribunal.

It is accepted that the appellant is a  Sri  Lankan  national  born  in  May
1995.

His history shows he has claimed asylum in Austria  in  2016  unsuccessfully
and then in the same year in Switzerland.  In August 2016  he  travelled  to
France and then back to Dubai on a false passport but he was  refused  entry
and deported to Sri Lanka.  He  said  he  was  taken  to  Sri  Lanka  on  21
November 2016 (that is how we read the  summary)  and  left  Sri  Lanka  for
Malaysia on 2 June 2017.  He was therefore in Sri Lanka for  a  little  over
six months.  In June 2017 he had travelled  from  Malaysia  to  Europe.   He
claimed asylum in the United Kingdom on 2 March 2017.  It  was  refused  and
certified on safe third country grounds  but  he  was  not  removed  and  he
attended an asylum interview in March 2019.

We begin by considering his  screening  interview  on  2  August  2019.   We
remind ourselves that the purpose of a screening  interview  is  to  outline
the nature of the claim so that it might be  processed  expeditiously  so  a
degree of imprecision on the part of the asylum seeker or the record  keeper
is easy to excuse provided  it  was  consistent  with  the  purpose  of  the
interview which was to categorise the claim correctly.

According to the record, in his screening interview  he  identified  himself
with the  name  and  birth  date  that  he  used  before  the  Tribunal  but
volunteered promptly in response to an early question that  he  had  used  a
different passport containing his photograph but he  was  vague  about  name
and date of birth.  He said that he  had  had  a  Sri  Lankan  passport  and
identity card in his own name but it was confiscated by the Sri Lankan  Army
in 2015.

He was a Tamil who followed the Hindu religion  and  came  from  the  Jaffna
area of Sri Lanka.  In  response  to  questions  about  his  health  or  any
special needs he said that he suffered  from  insomnia  over  a  three  year
period in Sri Lanka and he took medication but not in  the  United  Kingdom.
In answer to question 2.1 he said: "I get fits since childhood, it comes  if
I physically work too hard whop (sic) when the army beat  me  I got  fits".
He said he last had a fit in 2015.  He did not take medication.

He made it plain that he had  mental  health  problems  which  affected  his
sleep.  He said:

  "I get sad about the things which have happened to me and  also  to  what
  happened to my brother, he died, my father was also tortured and suffered
  injuries to his back passage."

He said the army had beaten him, that his gums were wasting, that  the  army
inserted something into his penis similar to a skewer so he  had  a  burning
sensation when he  passed  urine  and  he  had  marks  over  his  body  from
cigarette burns and on his back where he was burnt with a heated knife.

He had no treatment or medication for these conditions.

He was asked about travel to the United Kingdom.  He had been  fingerprinted
in Sri Lanka when he was captured in November 2015  and  detained  for  more
than one month.

His fingerprints were taken in Austria and  in  Switzerland.   He  was  also
taken to Dubai but could not enter the country because his faulty  documents
were detected.  He said when he was returned to Sri Lanka  his  mother  told
him not to return home because there was a risk of a search for him  and  he
stayed with an aunt in Jaffna.

He gave details of his journey to the United Kingdom and how  he  hid  in  a
vehicle to facilitate entry.

When asked to give a brief indication of the difficulties he would  face  in
Sri Lanka he said in the event of his return he  would  not  be  alive.   He
feared the army.  His summary is in the following terms:

  "The army abducted my brother.  I had an uncle, father's younger  brother
  who was with the Tigers, it was because of him my brother  was  abducted.
  So I along with other people  when  and  highlighted  about  the  missing
  people, my brother.  We attended the National Heroes' Day celebrations."

He said the Sri Lankan Army believed he was trying to reorganise  the  Tiger
group.

He had never been in Government employment including the armed services.

He was asked if he had ever been detained and he said  he  was  detained  by
the Sri Lankan Army in November 2015 for one month, then again when  he  was
returned from Dubai into Sri Lanka.  He was also detained for about  ten  to
fifteen days in Austria and five to six months in Switzerland  and  five  or
six days in France.  In answer to a question if  there  was  any  particular
reason why he ought not to be detained he said: "I have a problem, if  I  am
alone I would be thinking all the time."

He was then interviewed on 28 March 2019.  In the course of  that  interview
he began by saying he was taking medication for insomnia and he  had  mental
health problems.  He also had fits.  He had had not fits since he  had  come
to the United Kingdom and had medication for insomnia.  He had  thoughts  of
self-harm.  Bad memories concerning his experiences in  Sri  Lanka  troubled
him particularly at night.  He referred to one example of  wanting  to  dash
his head against the wall and his uncle stopped him.

He had produced pictures of his scars and  pictures  of  him  protesting  in
Westminster that he produced to be considered.

He was satisfied with what he had said in the screening interview.  He  gave
details of his work and accommodation in Sri Lanka.

In answer to a question about how many siblings he had  he  said  his  older
brother was abducted but altogether he had three.  He was the  third  child.
He repeated that a brother had been abducted.  He  was  asked  a  series  of
questions about matters appertaining to Sri Lanka, presumably  this  was  an
attempt to test his claim to be a Sri Lankan national and  he  answered  the
questions satisfactorily.  Dealing about his reasons for claiming asylum  he
said that his life was at risk and he came to a  democratic  country  "so  I
feel that justice will be done for me".  He feared both  the  army  and  the
EPDP.

He feared the army because his uncle was an LTTE  member  and  because  they
had taken his brother for inquiry and never released him.  Asked  about  his
personal fear of the army he said that there was  a  protest  about  missing
people that he attended and he held his  brother's  photograph  and  chanted
slogans.  He had also helped rehabilitate a friend of his uncles who was ex-
LTTE and he worked on "our farm".

The interviewing officer,  appropriately,  assured  the  appellant  that  he
would have an opportunity to explain how events unfolded and invited him  to
answer the question asked and  to  explain  why  he  feared  the  army.   He
replied: "I have engaged  myself  in  the  great  Heroes'  Day  events,  for
example I lighted a candle."  He then explained that  the  army  had  called
him and accused him of supporting  the  LTTE  because  he  was  his  uncle's
nephew.  The army wanted information about the location  of  his  uncle  and
threatened to detain him like his brother and that he might too disappear.

He identified his uncle by name and confirmed that his uncle  was  a  member
of the LTTE and he  was  helping  with  armaments.   He  explained  that  he
delivered arms on instructions.  He was not the driver  but  travelled  with
the driver.  He did not know his rank in the LTTE.  He pointed  out  he  was
about 10 years old at the time.  His uncle was an LTTE  member  as  long  as
the LTTE existed and he did not know his present whereabouts.

He described the EPDP as a political group that supported the Government.

The appellant denied having any political opinion.

Asked why he feared the EPDP he explained that he had helped  another  Tamil
party by posting notices and at election times going  to  the  voting  booth
and encouraging support for his party.  The implication is that he had  made
enemies.  He identified the party that he supported as the Sri Lankan  Tamil
Political Party.  He was not a member but helped them.   He  said  the  EPDP
were linked with the army and they were angry because he had  supported  the
pro-Tamil party and because he came from a "Tiger family".  He thought  that
they thought he was influenced by his uncle.  He  feared  the  EPDP  because
they acted as spies for the army  and  he  thought  they  would  be  out  to
provoke the army against him.  Asked if he had had  any  negative  encounter
with the EPDP he said when his father  was  "in  the  field"  the  EPDP  had
beaten him and they would throw stones at the house at night.

He was then asked when he participated in a Heroes' Day event.  He  said  in
Sri Lanka on 27 November 2015.

He was then asked how he knew it was the  EPDP  that  threw  stones  and  he
replied that they had attacked his father.  We find it  plain  that  he  did
not know that it was the EPDP who threw stones but that is what he  thought.
 He then said that his problems started on 28 November 2015 which  was  the
day after he claimed to have attended the Heroes' Day event.

He was asked to explain what happened that day.   He  said  after  attending
the Heroes' Day event he came home and he  found  his  parents  crying.   He
said they his parents had been warned "I won't be there anymore  and  wanted
to know where I was".  He said they had also  kicked  his  mother  and  his
mother asked him to leave the house and go.

He had had problems before 27 November 2015.  He had had  problems  in  2010
when the army came home and wanted to take his brother for inquiry.  He  was
then asked if he personally had had any issues with the  army  or  the  EPDP
before 27 November 2015.  He said in 2007 he felt  he  had  to  change  his
name.  The answer is a  little  hard  to  understand  but  he  seems  to  be
suggesting  that  his  name  linked  him  to  his  uncle  and  that   caused
difficulties and after that his parents changed the family name.

He said that when the army were expected LTTE activity in the area they  "do
a round up" took people to the temple.

He was asked (question 91) if he had any issues himself that day apart  from
the fact that he was asked about who had named him.  He said:

  "Father took my brother to the army for the enquiry.   But  it  as  (sic)
  nighttime but they had not returned.  The following day my father went to
  the army to enquire about my brother".

He had forgotten the date in 2007 when the roundup took place.

He insisted that he could not  remember  the  month  when  his  father  fell
victim of the 2007 roundup.

He was then asked (question 94): "In 2007 did you personally experience  any
other negative encounter with the army?"  He replied "my  father  had  urine
problems, after they beat him he went to hospital".

When pressed about his personal negative encounters in  2007  he  said  that
his father went to hospital in 2011.  The next question  (96)  suggests  the
interviewing  officer,  understandably,  was  becoming  frustrated  and   he
politely asked the appellant to concentrate on the question.  Reminding  him
that he was asking the appellant about any problems he may have had in  2007
and he replied: "They warned me that you have to change your name  otherwise
we will not spare you as you are a little boy.  This is  not  the  name  for
you.  You have to change your name".

He explained that, according to the Sri Lankan officials, only LTTE  members
have names like the name he had then.

He then said that he was aged 12 in 2007 when his parents changed  his  name
and he recalled it being in the month of November.  This appears  consistent
with his declared date of birth.

He said that in 2008 the army checked at the school to see if his  name  had
indeed been changed.  He was told that by a  relative  that  worked  in  the
school.

He was then asked when he next had problems with  the  army  after  2007  or
with the EPDP.  He replied "I was returning home from  the  hospital.   The
army would stand in the junction and call me and asked me some questions  as
to where I have been."  He explained that they were not threatening  towards
him but they did tell him that he did  not  "need  to  go"  to  his  father.
Rather they said that they had beaten him and he would die.

He was asked why his father was beaten and explained that  his  brother  was
taken for an inquiry and since he had not returned home his father  went  to
find out about the appellant's brother and he was beaten.   When  asked,  he
said that his father asked about his brother in October 2010 which  was  the
occasion his brother was taken.

After a short break he was asked why he had attended the Heroes'  Day  event
and  he  replied  "because  they  have  sacrificed  their  lives  for   us".
Unsurprisingly in answer to a supplementary question he  explained  that  he
meant the LTTE.  Nevertheless he said he was only a small  boy  and  he  did
not support the LTTE.  He was young when the war ended and he  attended  the
event because it was commemorating people who  had  sacrificed  their  lives
for the Tamil cause.  He said the event was mostly attended  by  young  boys
and he went with about eight friends.  He explained that the  event  was  on
the premises of Jaffna University  and  he  said  "we  pay  homage  and  put
flowers and put garlands around their photographs".  He  thought  that  most
of the people present were students and definitely more than  a  100  people
attended.  He guessed that the number was  about  200.   It  was  an  annual
event so he knew  it  would  take  place.   Similar  events  took  place  at
different locations on the same date.  Sometimes ceremonies are  in  temples
and bells are rung.

He did not attend the event in 2014 or 2013.  He was prompted to  attend  in
2015 because there was the added  dimension  of  protesting  about  "missing
people".

He did not know if there were Government officials  present  at  the  event.
The army was on patrol  outside.   He  said  that  the  army  "always"  stay
outside the university to watch who goes in but he had  no  encounters  with
the army that day.  He said the army came to  his  home  the  next  day,  28
November 2015.  They were searching for him  because  he  had  attended  the
protest about missing people and  had  shouted  slogans  against  the  army.
Asked what slogans he had shouted he replied "LKA had only taken my  brother
and he still has not come  home"  and  "to  hand  him  over  to  us  is  the
Government's responsibility" and "the people  who  had  done  it  should  be
punished".  It may be that something has been lost in the translation.

He then said that he attended the  "missing  people's  protest"  in  October
2015 and he attended with another person who had a loved one missing.   That
was just a person who had been introduced by a  friend  two  or  three  days
before the protest took place.   Between  70  and  80  people  were  at  the
protest which took place next to the nallurt.   He  said  that  was  usually
regarded as part of Jaffna.  There was one female MP present  and  the  army
were some distance away watching.  He was not approached on  that  occasion.
He said that they had been to his house on  the  same  day  as  his  protest
(143).  He said they attended his home in  October  2015  to  inquire  about
him.  They went home. He believed they had sent people to  monitor  him  and
see what he was doing.

Question  148  begins  with  the,  in  our  experience  unusual  observation
"(Applicant falls asleep)" but he was asked and said he  indicated  that  he
was able to continue, so they did.

He said that he had been monitored since he was  helping  the  Tamil  Party.
That did not stop him attending the commemoration and he said two lives  had
been lost, one was his uncle and the other his brother.

He was asked about his uncle's death.  He said that his uncle moved  to  the
Vanni area in 2006 and they had one telephone conversation and had not  been
in contact since.  After the war ended his friend  came  for  rehabilitation
and said his uncle's whereabouts were not known.

He was then asked about 28 November 2015.  The appellant said  that  he  was
going to work and he saw some army personnel standing in  civilian  clothing
and they stopped his bicycle.  Someone then threw him from the  bicycle  and
tied his own hands behind his back and blindfolded him  and  put  him  in  a
jeep.  He said  this  happened  about  6  o'clock  in  the  morning  and  he
clarified that it was the day after attending the Heroes' Day  event  on  27
November 2015.   Nevertheless  he  returned  home  after  the  event  on  27
November but before he got home on the 27 the army had  visited  and  kicked
his mother who told the appellant to leave.

He said he knew they were army officials because they took him  to  an  army
camp.  When he was there he was slapped.  He  was  asked  to  sign  a  blank
sheet of paper and when he refused they scraped  his  wrist  with  scissors.
He described the camp as "big" with a barbed wire fence.  In the room  where
he was interrogated there were five or six  "officers"  and  the  appellant,
all asking questions.  Questions were, for example, "where  is  your  uncle"
or "where is my brother" or "why did you attend the protest".

The interviewing officer asked the appellant if he could  explain  why  they
asked about the whereabouts of his brother and uncle if it was the army  who
had taken them.  He was not able to offer an explanation for that.

He said he was detained on that occasion.  He was released  on  30  December
2015.

He was asked about the officials, they were all in  civilian  clothing.   He
said in the whole period of his detention of one month he was tortured.   He
said it was dark, there were sandbags and a bench in the interrogation  room
and he would be seated on the bench and he would  be  asked  questions  from
the opposite side.  He described it as a narrow long room.

He was given food once a day and  he  was  given  water.   He  said  he  was
tortured three times a day, mostly on his  back  and  stomach,  and  he  was
beaten which is why he could not sit properly  in  a  chair  and  they  also
burnt him on his  feet  with  cigarette  burns.   He  said  when  they  were
torturing him they accused him of trying to revive the  LTTE.   He  said  he
had no idea if they had any evidence to support that suspicion but that  was
the accusation.  He was released after his uncle got in touch with a  friend
and gave some money.  It is a different uncle that assisted.  The  uncle  in
the LTTE was a paternal uncle.

He said he was released during the night.  He was taken in a jeep  somewhere
and stopped and they put him out and told him he would be  picked  up  which
he was.  He did sign the blank sheet of paper but he did not  sign  anything
on release.  His maternal uncle's friend collected him.  He allowed  him  to
talk to his parents who said he must go  somewhere  else  and  he  left  the
country after his release.  He said he left by an aeroplane on  13  February
2016 from Katunayake Airport which we understand is the  main  international
airport service in Colombo.

There was a further break.

The appellant confirmed afterwards that he was feeling  fit  and  well.   He
said that after he was released on 30 December 2015 he stayed  at  the  home
of a friend of his paternal uncle.  He did not go out when  he  was  staying
at that house.  He remained indoors and watched films.  His  uncle's  friend
had family living in the house and the appellant had a room there.  He  left
for the airport by a van.  It was a five  hour  drive  away  but  they  came
across no trade checkpoints on the journey.

He was asked how he got through the airport  without  attracting  attention.
He said his uncle's friend accompanied him and airport  officials  had  been
bribed.  He was asked why his uncle's friend would  do  that  for  him.   He
replied: "he only pointed at the counter that I should go,  and  they  never
asked  me  any  questions".   His  uncle's  friend  went  with  him  on  the
aeroplane.

The recorded answers from around question 201 seem to us a little  confusing
and appear to have confused the interrogator a little  too.   The  appellant
said  that  he  thought  he  could  "find  the  solution  for  my  brother's
disappearance" and that would lead to the culprits being punished.  He  said
they still do not know what had happened to his brother but when  asked  how
he knew the Government was responsible in any way  he  replied  in  question
204: "because they came home and took my  brother  for  an  inquiry".   When
pressed to explain  how  he  knew  it  was  Government  officials  who  were
complicit in his brother's disappearance the appellant  just  repeated  that
they had taken him for inquiry and never released  him.   He  said  he  knew
that they had not been released because  "when  my  father  went  and  asked
them, they said they hadn't taken him".  Then the officers who arrested  his
brother arrived in uniform.

He said that in addition  to  encouraging  people  to  vote  for  the  Tamil
Political Party his other political activity had been  the  protest  meeting
about missing people.  He  had  helped  with  the  campaign  for  the  Tamil
Political Party.  For example he gave out voting  cards  and  showed  people
how to vote.

It was put to him that he had claimed not to have had  any  political  views
and he said he was supporting them in the hope  of  getting  a  favour  from
them.  He thought they could put pressure on the government to find  missing
people.  He became involved with the Tamil Political Party since  2013.   He
would make announcements about meetings and tell people  how  to  vote.   He
was 18 in 2013.

There is a helpful note at question 215 where it seems the interpreter  made
plain that "the Tamil Political Party" was a reference to the  Tamil  Nation
Alliance which had been interpreted in the way indicated.

The appellant explained how he got to know about the TNA.  They came to  the
village and canvassed.  His brother was not a member  of  the  LTTE  but  he
used to go with his uncle.

He was then asked about his journey to the United Kingdom and he  was  asked
to explain why he feared the army.  He said  when  they  released  him  they
told him that he should remain  in  the  country  and  not  talk  about  his
brother disappearing. He had not done as the  army  instructed  and  he  was
frightened.

He had taken part in a protest instead.  He said he took part in  a  protest
in the United Kingdom because:

  "we have lost all our rights, even my uncle sacrificed his life, so  many
  people have given their lives for our sake.  Because of this my  life  is
  like this.  So I am in desperate mood."

He was then asked to explain why if, as he  claimed,  he  had  no  political
views he would want to support the TNA actively and protest against  affairs
in Sri Lanka.  He replied:

  "I took part due to my frustration.  They are the majority and we are the
  minority.  No matter what we do we are not going to get anything.  If  we
  do anything here, at least the Government will pressurise LKA  Government
  and get something done."

He said (question 223) that in the United Kingdom he took part in the  great
Heroes' Day event on 27 November 2018 and then

  "last year an army official called Frenando showed the sign of a  cutting
  a throat and we protest, mid-part of last year, that photo I  have  given
  is 14 March 2019 opposite Westminster took place."

It was put to him that in his screening interview he said  his  brother  had
died and now he only talked about brother being missing.   He  replied  that
he did not expect his brother to be alive and that is why  he  said  he  was
dead.  He then  said  in  his  screening  interview  he  had  named  various
countries he had travelled through but today said he had  travelled  through
unknown countries.  He said that he had  explained  what  countries  he  was
travelling through when he was sent back to Sri Lanka.  He was quite  matter
of fact that he had gone to Dubai on a fake passport  and  got  caught.   He
returned to Sri Lanka on 21 November 2016 and was stopped  at  the  airport.
He did not have a travel document.  He had been deported.  He was  then  put
in prison until 20 December 2016.  He was asked why he was detained  and  he
said:

  "So they could inquire and have a  court  case.   If  they  file  a  case
  against me I would not have been able to leave  the  country  and  so  he
  quickly aided my release."

At question 234 he was asked "why would the official want  to  file  a  case
against you?"  And  he  replied  "because  from  Dubai  they  sent  me  with
handcuff like  a  prisoner."   He  accepted  that  in  their  minds  he  had
dishonoured the country by travelling on a  false  passport.   When  he  was
released or escaped his parents had advised him not to go home and  he  went
to stay with an aunt and his aunt got him a job in a shop.

He said he first left Sri Lanka in February 2016 and second time left it  in
July 2017.  Any contrary suggestion was an error in the screening  interview
record.  They had put June but it was July.

Asked if there was anything he wanted to clarify he said when he  went  back
in May 2017 he was caught and that motivated him to leave the  country.   He
then said:

  "Some kind of torture I went through, I am unable to speak about it.  Now
  I can't even cry, all these years I cried  no  tears  come  to  my  eyes.
  Everyone sleep peacefully now I have to get to a stage where I  have  to
  take tables [tablets?]."

Then he said this was a reference to putting a wooden piece into  his  penis
and he had difficulty urinating.  He was embarrassed talking about  it.   He
said the effects were still there, his legs shake if he was  sitting  for  a
long time.

We find question 242 and its answer  interesting  because  of  the  way  the
appellant expressed himself.  He was asked: "Did all  the  events  we  spoke
about happen before your first departure  from  Sri  Lanka?"   The  recorded
reply is: "Yes, only the incident in May that happened when I returned."

He was called by the army in May 2017.  Then said he had just finished  work
going to his aunt's house and he went to a shop to purchase some  items,  he
was seen by the army and soldiers went to the house  and  asked  his  mother
about him who denied any connection with him.  They then came  to  the  shop
and waited to catch him, they caught him, beat him severely and took him  to
Palaly Camp and detained him.  He was questioned about  what  he  was  doing
for the  LTTE  and  scolded  for  leaving  the  country  contrary  to  their
instructions.  They then demanded that he declare  his  uncle's  whereabouts
or they would shoot him and they put the gun in  his  mouth  and  threatened
him.

He said they did not believe him when he indicated his uncle had died.

He was asked why he had not mentioned this earlier and  he  replied  "you're
only asking about it now, that is why I'm telling you  about  it  now".   He
was detained for 25 days.  He escaped with the assistance of the shop  owner
getting in touch "with the EPDP".  He said the EPDP member came to the  camp
and took him out and took him to his uncle's  house.   It  was  pointed  out
that he had said he feared the EPDP and he replied: "the shopkeeper did  not
tell him who I was, just said I am someone who needs  help  and  he  got  me
released".  He then indicated in  reply  to  a  question  about  if  he  had
forgotten anything  that  "because  of  the  medication,  I  forget  things,
sometimes I remember now and sometimes I forget.  That's all for now."

The appellant made a witness statement dated 22 December 2019.

It began with an apology for the late  submission  which  he  attributed  in
part at least to poor concentration and  an  inability  to  focus.   He  was
troubled at the prospect of return to Sri Lanka.   Indeed  he  indicated  he
would rather end his life in the United Kingdom.

He complained that he had suffered from nightmares  and  flashbacks  and  he
was on antidepressant medication.  He said he  now  had  suicidal  ideations
and he was embarrassed to be like that.  He said:

  "I find it difficult to sleep and wake up in sweats and I get  flashbacks
  of what they did to me when I was in detention in Sri Lanka  and  I  have
  the scars to show what they did.  What makes me worse, is that  I  suffer
  from fits and it really makes me nervous."

He provided a psychiatric report from Dr Dhumad.

The appellant  recognised  that  he  was  not  always  clear  and  said  his
solicitors had a lot of difficulty in getting clear answers  from  him.   He
said he had been attending pro-Tamil and anti-Government  demonstrations  in
the United Kingdom and that had helped him come to terms with the  situation
in Sri Lanka.

He said the country situation had changed and the Rajapakse family are  back
in power and he regards the situation to be that the Tamils face  a  serious
risk in the event of return.  He repeated that his  paternal  uncle  was  in
the LTTE and his brother was abducted by the  army  as  a  result  of  their
uncle's notoriety.

He said his problems started in Sri Lanka many years ago, that  his  brother
was taken in a roundup in 2010 and that he was told to change  his  name  as
it sounded like an LTTE member's name.

He had incidents of being questioned,  intimidated  and  threatened  by  the
army.

The end of the statement is incomplete and  refers  to  something  happening
involving his father in October 2010.

He then said he attracted the adverse attention of the army by attending  an
LTTE Heroes' Day celebration on 27 November 2015.  He said  it  was  not  in
2017 as was recorded in answer to questions at interview.  He said that  was
a clear typing error.

The army came to search for him on 28 November 2015 when he was  stopped  on
his bicycle and arrested and questioned about his  uncle's  whereabouts  and
brother's whereabouts and taken away and  horrifically  ill-treated  and  he
had explained that.  He then repeated  the  claim  to  have  left  detention
after signing a blank sheet of paper and released on a payment of  a  bribe.
He said he was able to get through the  airport  in  February  2016  because
bribes had  been  paid  to  an  immigration  official  and  he  went  to  an
appropriate counter and was allowed to pass through.

He said he was  very  worried  about  returning  to  Sri  Lanka  as  he  had
previously been involved with the TNA a Tamil  nationalist  party  which  is
perceived as pro-LTTE and he was afraid of being arrested again  and  as  he
had left detention illegally and warned not to go anywhere  he  had  invited
trouble.

He said his problems did not end because when he was deported from Dubai  he
was rearrested and detained for 25 days and questioned about his past.

He repeated he could not concentrate and had produced a  psychiatric  report
about that.

Dealing with specific points he said that his brother was abducted in  2010.
 He accepted he gave an inconsistent and unclear account but  he  attributed
that to the mental health problems and he  apologised.   He  then  said  the
army came to arrest him on 28 November 2015.  He had no explanation for  the
Home Office not arresting him on the Heroes' Day.  He could  not  speak  for
the army, he could only say that they came to arrest him the next day.

He believed that his uncle was an LTTE martyr but he was young at the time.

The authorities had told him that his uncle had come out  of  rehabilitation
and the appellant was questioned about his LTTE activities,  his  uncle  and
his brother but he did not know whether the authorities  had  told  him  the
truth.  He attached a  medical  report  and  insisted  that  corruption  was
widespread in Sri Lanka and especially at the airport.   He  did  not  agree
that he should be refused asylum because  his  application  was  refused  in
Switzerland and Austria.

He feared both the army and the EPDP.  He said the  author  of  the  refusal
letter does not realise that the EPDP are corrupt  and  can  be  bribed  and
work with the army and outside the army and he was at risk from them.

He did not agree that failure to claim in other countries meant that he  was
not telling the truth about his claim.

He concluded by signing the statement to indicate  that  the  statement  was
true and accurate and had been read  back  to  him  in  Tamil.   Given  that
paragraph 9 peters out mid-sentence that is regrettable.

There is  a  medical  report  from  Dr  Andres  Izquierdo-Martin  who  is  a
consultant in emergency medicine and whose relevant  qualifications  include
his being a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons  and  a  fellow  of  the
Royal  College  of  Emergency  Medicine.   He  said  he   had   considerable
experience working in plastic surgery in a burns unit and  claimed  specific
expertise in writing reports on victims  of  torture  and  had  prepared  in
excess of 800 such reports.

He found  a  variety  of  scars.   He  was  particularly  concerned  with  a
pigmented scar some seven centimetres (about two and three  quarter  inches)
on the left side of the upper back which  was  attributed  to  being  burned
with a heated iron rod.  There were several small scars attributed to  being
beaten and scars around the ankles attributed to being  burnt  with  lighted
cigarettes.  A scar that was said to have been caused  with  a  thin  heated
knife was described as "highly  consistent"  with  the  description  of  the
events complained of.  He  could  not  attribute  any  sensible  alternative
cause.  It was not the  kind  of  mark  that  would  come  as  a  result  of
accidental injury.  Even if there was some reason to suspect  the  appellant
might have inflicted it on himself, it would be  difficult  to  see  how  he
could have manipulated the knife to have caused the injury.   In  any  event
self-inflicted injuries tended to be more superficial.  He was not aware  of
any kind of cultural or religious activity that produced  scarring  of  that
kind.

The scars caused that were attributed to repeated beating were described  as
"highly  consistent"  and  the  scars  caused  on  the  feet  attributed  to
cigarette burns were typical.  He had explained elsewhere that it  was  very
difficult to date scars but they were consistent  with  injuries  more  than
two years earlier.

The report is supplemented by a very clear  "front  on"  photograph  of  the
appellant's face.

There  is  then  a  report  from  Dr  Saleh  Dhumad  who  is  a   consultant
psychiatrist.  He is presently working as a private consultant  psychiatrist
but was a National Health Service consultant psychiatrist for  eight  years.
His relevant qualifications include  membership  of  the  Royal  College  of
Psychiatrists and a masters degree in cognitive behavioural therapy.

The appellant was found to present with low mood, loss of  appetite,  weight
loss, loss of concentration, suicidal ideation and poor sleep.  It  was  the
doctor's opinion that he was suffering from post-traumatic  stress  symptoms
such as avoidance, flashback and nightmare.

Dr Dhumad found his  observations  consistent  with  the  diagnosis  of  the
general medical practitioner and the Mental  Health  Service.   He  regarded
him as unfit to attend court and give evidence although  fit  to  provide  a
statement which could  be  taken  in  congenial  conditions.   We  would  be
inclined to have assumed the next observation if it had not  been  said  but
we record that Dr Dhumad said:

  "At 16.8 I have considered the possibility that he might be  feigning  or
  exaggerating his mental illness.  I have not  taken  his  story  at  face
  value but carefully examined his symptomology and his emotional reactions
  during the interview.  I have also considered the evidence before me.  It
  is my clinical opinion that this clinical presentation is consistent with
  a diagnosis of depression and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder."

He then went on to  explain  that  comment.   He  regarded  the  appellant's
attendance at Tamil demonstrations in the United Kingdom as "a  healthy  way
for sufferers to express their anger  towards  the  Sri  Lankan  Government,
where they feel safe and supported by empathetic people and other  victims."
 He went on to describe this as "therapeutic".

There is medical evidence from  the  National  Health  Foundation  which  we
regard as supportive.

There is also a document entitled "The Impact of Torture  on  Post-Traumatic
Stress Symptoms on War Affected Tamil Refugees  and  Immigrants".   We  have
not found that report helpful.  We do not criticise it in any  way  for  its
learning but its conclusion, that the study of Tamil torture survivors  from
Sri Lanka living in Australia exhibited high levels  of  PTSD  symptoms  and
compatriots who had experienced other forms of  war  trauma,  is  inherently
unremarkable and only of peripheral relevance because it tends to show  that
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder is more common amongst people  who  have  had
adverse dealings with the Sri Lankan Authorities than who  have  experienced
other kinds of trauma.  We do not think it adds anything to the evidence  of
Dr Dhumad.

There is a Tamil membership card showing a person with the appellant's  name
to be a Tamil Eelam national.   There  is  a  picture  on  that  card  which
closely matches the picture that is incorporated in the  medical  report  of
Dr Izquierdo-Martin and we are satisfied  it  is  clear  evidence  that  the
appellant has obtained a Tamil Eelam national card.

We note there are photographs of the appellant  in  the  photocopied  bundle
before the Tribunal.  They are identified particularly at page  78  where  a
person who standing in a  crowd  of  demonstrators  is  highlighted  with  a
manuscript circle and the letter "A".  These are side pictures, rather  than
full frontal pictures and are therefore less valuable than they  might  have
been but still suggest to  us  strongly  that  the  appellant  was  at  that
demonstration.  There is then an article entitled "Case against  'beheading'
Brigadier who made a gesture  of  beheading  to  be  reheard".   This  is  a
reference to a former of defence attach for the  High  Commission  for  Sri
Lanka who had been convicted  at  the  Westminster  Magistrates'  Court  for
making a  "beheading"  gesture  in  a  way  that  might  be  thought  to  be
intimidating demonstrators who attended the court hearing.  We do  not  find
it necessary to delve into that at all.  The point is  that  the  LTTE  flag
was on display outside the court and a sometime high  official  of  the  Sri
Lankan  High  Commission  was  seen  expressing  his  disapproval   of   the
demonstrators.  We remind ourselves that this  is  a  newspaper  report  and
that journalists are not subject to peer review but it gives some weight  to
the claim that the Sri Lankan Authorities were indeed interested  in  events
taking place at that court when the demonstration took place.

There is a complementary article from the  Colombo  Telegraph  referring  to
the  case  as  a  judgment  on  diplomatic  immunity.   This  supports   the
contention that there was considerable interest in the  case  in  Sri  Lanka
and therefore the contention that the authorities  would  be  interested  in
the identity of demonstrators.

There is also  evidence  that  the  former  defence  chief  who  led  brutal
suppression of the  Tamil  Tigers  wins  a  presidential  election.   It  is
against this background that we have to make findings.

Whilst acknowledging the reasons advanced by  the  Secretary  of  State  for
disbelieving the appellant and accepting the inevitability  of  his  failure
to claim asylum on his  way  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  damaging  to  his
credibility we do not find these points particularly illuminating.

We prefer to start with the evidence that is  unarguable  and  this  is  the
medical evidence.  The evidence relied upon comes from apparently  competent
medical practitioners with appropriate experience who have produced  reports
subject to the conditions requisite of  expert  evidence.   They  have  been
disclosed properly, there is nothing obviously deficient in  their  contents
and there is no counter evidence against which we  might  check  or  balance
the opinions.

We accept  that  the  appellant  is  suffering  from  Post-Traumatic  Stress
Disorder, we accept that that is particularly prevalent amongst  people  who
claim to have been tortured by the Tamil  state  and,  most  importantly  in
this case, we accept the perfectly clear evidence that the  appellant  is  a
man who has been ill-treated.  The weakest evidence  concerns  the  scarring
on his ankles and even that is persuasive.  The other  scars  on  his  body,
and most importantly the burn mark,  on  his  back  are,  we  find,  clearly
indicative of a man who has been seriously ill-used.

The starting point in our decision making therefore is that this  man  is  a
Tamil, that he is a citizen of Sri Lanka,  he  has  had  problems  with  the
authorities, that he has been ill-treated and, at least as far as  the  burn
mark is concerned, ill-treated in a way which is most complained of, in  our
experience, by people with links to the Tamil cause.

Against this clear finding we have to look at the  damaging  effect  of  his
damaged credibility.  It of course does not  undermine  his  claim  to  have
been injured which is established  by  another  route.   We  do  not  become
excited about the difficulties in the chronology.  The core  story  that  he
told is not particularly difficult to learn.  The fact  that  he  could  not
tell the story straight is, we find, at least as  consistent  with  somebody
who has memory and cognitive difficulties as a result of stress  and  trauma
as it is from somebody who just cannot remember a simple lie.

The appellant is a Tamil from Jaffna which at  the  material  times  was  an
LTTE stronghold.  Many people living there had links with the  LTTE  leading
to members of their family taking part and themselves being  taken  away  by
the Sri Lankan Authorities. The appellant's claim  is  inherently  plausible
and supported by the evidence of scarring. Given the low standard  of  proof
applicable to these proceedings we are satisfied that he has  been  tortured
by the Sri Lankan Authorities because of his perceived links with the LTTE.

His references to fearing the EPDP are rather hard to  follow.   It  is,  we
find, a strange suggestion that this organisation which is essentially  pro-
Government and anti-Tamil, uncritically supported the appellant for  corrupt
purposes and now  bears  him  a  grudge  for  reasons  that  were  not  well
explained.  Whether this is a part of his story that is just  not  explained
very well or a gloss on the truth which has not really stood up to  scrutiny
we are not sure but  we  do  not  accept  there  is  any  proper  basis  for
accepting there is a fear of the EPDP.

It does not follow form this that he has  now  a  genuine  and  well-founded
fear of the Sri Lankan.  We are not  particularly  concerned  about  exactly
what happened to him when he returned to Sri  Lanka  from  Dubai.   What  is
most significant to us is that he was returned and whatever interest in  him
was expressed by the Sri Lankan Authorities he was released and released  in
circumstances that enabled him to escape through the  international  airport
to the United Kingdom.  It may be that corruption eased his passage at  some
stage but the fact that he was released indicates that he is not a  man  who
is prominent or on any kind of wanted list or actively  sought  by  the  Sri
Lankan Authorities.  Nor is there any reason to think  that  he  should  be.
He was plainly a young person at the time of the greatest LTTE activity.

However we accept  that  he  has  been  ill-treated  and  we  regard  it  as
inherently likely that there  will  be  some  sort  of  record  of  official
interest.  Indeed the scar on his back  would  indicate  such  ill-treatment
and, possibly, it was put there for precisely that purpose.

Given his previous ill-treatment at the hands of the Sri Lankan  Authorities
we find that if he does come to their attention there  is  a  real  risk  of
further ill treatment.

Not without some hesitation we have come to the conclusion that there  is  a
real risk of his coming to their  attention.   There  are  two  reasons  for
this.  Firstly his past links, which we accept are because  of  some  family
activity, means he is known or  known  about  to  certain  officers  and  if
things become difficult in Sri Lanka again he is in the kind of category  of
people who might be of interest.

Importantly that is supplemented by our acceptance that he  has  taken  part
in Tamil separatist activities in the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  proved  at
least to the low standard necessary in these proceedings that  he  was  part
of a crowd that was demonstrating against the Sri Lankan  Authorities  at  a
Magistrates' Court.  It is also plain that there was  considerable  interest
by the Tamil Authorities in what happened there.  We have no way of  knowing
with any confidence just how much  recognition  software  there  may  be  or
ability to link people to United Kingdom activities but we  accept  that  in
many cases a real risk that the link will be made and this is such  a  case.


We reminded ourselves of the overall guidance in GJ (Sri  Lanka)  CG  [2013]
UKUT 319 (IAC), as well as what  was  said  subsequently  by  the  Court  of
Appeal in MP & NT [2014] EWCA Civ 829 and ME (Sri  Lanka)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
1486.  The Sri Lankan authorities clearly perceived the appellant to  be  of
interest in 2015 and 2017, years after the war had ended.  He was  seriously
ill treated for that reason.  The fact that he has suffered in that  way  in
the past is probative of the likely attitude of the Sri  Lankan  authorities
upon his return.  There is  no  reason  to  think  that  circumstances  have
changed for the better and,  in  light  of  his  participation  in  diaspora
activities, some reason to think that they have changed for the worse.

We come to the clear conclusion that there is at least a real  risk  of  the
appellant being detained again and  suffering  the  same  ill  treatment  he
suffered in the past.  We have very much  taken  on  board  the  damage  the
appellant has done to his case partly by his late  claiming  asylum,  partly
by being a poor historian which may not in any way be  his  fault  but  does
make his evidence less reliable but for all the reasons given we  find  that
he discharges the low standard of proof and we allow the appeal.   He  is  a
refugee.

Decision

We set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   We  substitute  a
decision allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 May 2020                     |






