
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11945/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 December 2018                     |On 23 January 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED [N]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna of Counsel instructed by Gurney Harden,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Muslim Tamil of Sri Lankan  nationality  born  on  6
    December 1981.  On 1 April 2017 he arrived with his wife and two  minor
    children and they were given leave to enter as  visitors.   On  11  May
    2017 he claimed international surrogate protection on  account  of  his
    fear of persecution by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  because  of  his
    involvement or perceived involvement  with  the  LTTE.   His  wife  and
    children claimed as his dependants.

The Respondent's Original Decision

 2. On 3 November 2017 the Respondent refused his application  and  further
    noted the Appellant and his family did not meet any of the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules for  leave  to  remain  on  account  of  their
    private and family lives and considered that there were no  exceptional
    circumstances warranting a consideration of their claim under Article 8
    of the European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Respondent noted the Appellant claimed to have worked in Dubai from
    2008 and would return to Sri Lanka for holidays.   His  claim  to  have
    been detained and tortured in July 2014 was found  to  be  inconsistent
    and not credible.  The Respondent similarly found inconsistent and  not
    credible the Appellant's account that while in the  United  Kingdom  in
    April 2017 for a holiday he had learned that Sri Lankan  officials  had
    visited his home on two occasions in Dubai looking for him in  relation
    to an investigation and had also  visited  his  parents'  home  in  Sri
    Lanka.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. On 15 November 2017 the Appellant lodged notice of  appeal  under  s.82
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).
     The grounds are generic and unnecessarily lengthy, citing and  quoting
    much case law.

 5. By a decision promulgated on 18  July  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal J Bartlett dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. The first ground is that the
    Judge had arguably erred in her treatment of the  documentary  evidence
    from  his  Sri  Lankan  attorney  and  in  her   application   of   the
    jurisprudence in Tanveer Ahmed  (Documents  -  Unreliable  and  forged)
    Pakistan* [2002] UKIAT 00439. The second is that she had arguably erred
    in her approach to the medical  evidence  of  Dr  Dhumad  and  also  in
    failing to consider the plausibility of the Appellant's account in  the
    light of the  country  guidance  in  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

 7. On 20 August 2018 permission to appeal was refused by a  Judge  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 8. The Appellant renewed the application to appeal on the same grounds and
    on 13 November 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission  on
    all grounds.

 9. Ms Patyna informed me at the start of the hearing  that  the  Appellant
    was in Field House but was too distressed to attend the hearing.

Submissions for the Appellant

10. Ms Patyna submitted that the documents from  the  Sri  Lankan  attorney
    supported  the  Appellant's  claim  to  fall  within  risk  category  D
    identified in GJ and Others.   The  Judge  had  not  given  a  reasoned
    finding to reject the evidence from him and had not addressed the issue
    of the relationship between the police message referred to at  page  38
    of the Appellant's bundle and the attorney's comments on it.   In  this
    light the rejection of the attorney's documents at paragraphs 47 and 48
    of her decision disclosed a material error of law.

11. I pointed out that there was no  copy  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  as
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal Judge any longer in the file.   Ms
    Patyna lent me her copy of the bundle.

12. Second, Dr Dhumad had identified the trigger for the Appellant's mental
    health condition as the Appellant's experience of torture.  The Judge's
    conclusions that little weight could be given to his expert  report  at
    paragraph 45 of her decision were not sustainable.

13. Third, particularly at paragraphs 40(iii) and (v) the Judge had  failed
    to take adequate account of the Upper Tribunal's  findings  in  GJ  and
    Others about the Sri Lankan authorities' concern about Tamil  activists
    in the diaspora working for Tamil separatism  and  to  destabilise  the
    unitary state and that the Appellant on his account was likely to be so
    perceived as well as the reporting of extra-judicial  killings  by  the
    authorities.  The Judge had not considered the Appellant's  claim  with
    due regard to the context of its origin, his perceived involvement with
    Raja and their business association.  In short, the Judge's  assessment
    of the Appellant's credibility was flawed and the  decision  could  not
    stand.

Submissions for the Respondent

14. Mr Kotas submitted that even if  the  documents  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    attorney were genuine they were not determinative  of  the  Appellant's
    claim in the light of  the  adverse  findings  made  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraphs 40-44.  There had been no challenge to the adverse  findings
    made in these paragraphs in the Grounds for Appeal.

15. The argument that there  existed  a  warrant  for  the  arrest  of  the
    Appellant did not resolve the Appellant's difficulties because  of  the
    other extensive adverse credibility findings made by  the  Judge.   She
    had  addressed  the  issue  of  the  perception   of   involvement   in
    "destabilising activities" at paragraph 41(iii)(a) and was justified in
    her conclusions, particularly in the light of the  Appellant's  failure
    to mention the LTTE referred to in paragraph 42.

16. Further, the Judge had not rejected the medical evidence  out  of  hand
    but had made legitimate criticisms of Dr Dhumad's report.  She may have
    been brief but her reasons are adequate to support  her  giving  little
    weight to it.

17. Turning to the last Ground for Appeal, Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  this
    amounted to no more than disagreement with the Judge. There was nothing
    in the country guidance cases to support the Appellant's claim to be at
    risk in the light of  the  specific  and  extensive  and  far  reaching
    adverse findings which the Judge had made.

Response for the Appellant

18. Ms Patyna responded that the Judge's failure to  look  closely  at  the
    documents from the Sri Lankan attorney was a failure  to  look  at  key
    evidence.  The  inconsistencies  identified  at  paragraph  40  of  her
    decision were  of  insufficient  weight  to  show  that  there  was  no
    alternative finding open to the Judge.  With  reference  to  paragraphs
    40(iii) and 40(v) the Appellant had explained how he was able to  leave
    Sri Lanka without being stopped at the  airport:  see  interview  reply
    148.

Consideration and Conclusion

19. The Judge made an adverse credibility finding against the Appellant  in
    paragraph 41 of her decision and then on the basis of that applied  the
    jurisprudence in Tanveer Ahmed to give little weight to  the  documents
    from the Sri Lankan attorney at paragraph 47.  Unfortunately, the Judge
    dealt with the expert psychiatric report of Dr Dhumad at paragraphs  45
    and 46 which meant that she dealt with the medical evidence  subsequent
    to making an adverse credibility finding and consequently offended  the
    requirement that a holistic assessment be  made:  see  Mibanga  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

20. Given the nature of the documentary evidence, namely from a Sri  Lankan
    attorney and the police message, the Appellant is justified in claiming
    the Judge should have addressed this evidence in more detail  than  she
    did. It was not sufficient  simply  to  attach  little  weight  to  it,
    applying the jurisprudence in Tanveer Ahmed.  While the Judge may  have
    been entitled to take against the Appellant that in  2014,  if  he  had
    been ill-treated as claimed, he would not have left his infant son with
    his parents-in-law  and  returned  to  Dubai.   However,  there  is  no
    reference in the Judge's decision whether  there  was  any  explanation
    requested or given for the decision to leave the child in Sri Lanka.

21. The Judge made no findings about the Appellant's employment  and  other
    circumstances in Dubai which might have had a material  impact  on  the
    credibility of his claim that his home had been visited by  Sri  Lankan
    officials while he had been on holiday with his family  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

22. On balance, I find the Judge has materially erred in law and  that  the
    decision should be set aside in its entirety with no findings  of  fact
    preserved.

23. Having regard to my view that no findings of fact from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision can be preserved, and to Practice Statement  7.2(b)
    I consider the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    hearing afresh.



Anonymity

24. There was no request for an anonymity direction and I see no reason  to
    make one.



SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law
    and is set aside.


    The appeal is to be heard afresh in the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no
    findings of fact preserved.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  11.
i. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
















