
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11211/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                |                                |
|On 22 August 2019                     |On 2 September 2019             |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                              SHEKU PAUL KARGBO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Sachdev for Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent: Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.  An  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in  respect  of  this
    Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances and  evidence  I  do
    not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A Davies promulgated on 9 April  2019,  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of protection on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that  the  Judge's  decision  was
    perverse in relation to his  rejection  of  the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Bolton; he failed to have  regard  to  the  background  material;  made
    contradictory finding.

 4. There is a Rule 24 notice  from  the  Respondent  dated  16  July  2019
    arguing that the Judge directed himself appropriately as to the correct
    standard of proof; that it was open to him to conclude  that  while  he
    had a genuine subjective fear it was not objectively well founded; that
    the Judge took the  correct  approach  in  assessing  whether  internal
    relocation was reasonable

 5.  On 3 July 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede gave permission to appeal.

 6. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Sachdev  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) Given those matters that were accepted in the  refusal  letter  the
         two relevant issues were sufficiency of protection if the Appellant
         were  to  return  to  his  home  area  and  the  reasonableness  of
         relocation.

      b) The Appellant  relied  on  an  expert  report  I  relation  to  the
         newspaper report and the conclusion of that was that the record was
         genuine. The conclusions were based on articles that were all fully
         sourced.

      c) In relation to the second report of Dr Bolton she accepted that  it
         was set out unusually in that she answered the questions  posed  by
         the Solicitors and then set out the background material leading  to
         those conclusions, she put the cart before the horse. In the report
         she talks of the culture of rumours and how they become legitimised
         in the society of Sierra Leone.

      d) The Judge made no reference to the background material which showed
         the antipathy of AML and the local community and the Tribunal  made
         up its mind before looking at the authentication of the article.

      e) In relation to the  Appellants  witness  the  Tribunal  focused  on
         whether there was a risk to him not on  the  evidence  he  gave  in
         respect of the risk to the Appellant.

      f) In relation to the standard of proof the Judge referred  to  'hard'
         evidence or 'concrete' evidence but this was  the  wrong  standard.
         The evidence before the Tribunal was that  of  the  Appellant.  The
         Appellant accounted for the fate of the others  in  his  team,  one
         killed, one fled to Dubai and he could only  talk  about  them  not
         what happened to others.

      g) The focus was on events in Sierra Leone but no recognition that the
         Appellant gave evidence in the  UK,  AML  lost  the  case  but  the
         company collapsed and could no longer protect him if  he  returned.
         The antipathy from the community was huge and this had an impact on
         the risk to him.

      h) In relation to sufficiency of protection the refusal letter did not
         reflect the reality of the situation and this was addressed by  the
         expert in her report.

 7. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Tan submitted that:

      a) The first ground of appeal was  a  rationality  challenge  and  the
         threshold for that was a high one.

      b) The Judge took into account the expert evidence but had before  him
         other evidence that the Judge had not seen or heard.

      c) In relation to the witness Mr Daboh the Judge recognised  that  the
         information the  witness  could  give  about  the  threats  to  the
         Appellant was limited and he was  entitled  to  conclude  that  his
         evidence was vague and lacking in detail.

      d) The Judge also considered the Appellants evidence in the context of
         the expert evidence and did not accept his case about the  threats.
         The weight he gave to the evidence of the Appellant and the  expert
         was a matter for him.

      e) The Judge applied the correct standard of proof and set it  out  in
         the decision and the use of the  words  'hard'  and  'concrete'  in
         respect of the evidence was merely a reflection of  the  nature  of
         the evidence.

      f) The Judge did not focus on events in Sierra Leone. At paragraphs  7
         and 23 he set out the claim including the fact that  the  Appellant
         was a witness for AML although he did  not  give  evidence  at  the
         trial in London but he recognised this did not lessen the hostility
         of the local community.  He was entitled to note that there  was  a
         period of time after which  the  Appellant  made  clear  he  was  a
         witness and before he left for London and yet nothing  happened  to
         him.

      g) In relation to the authentication of the newspaper report the Judge
         identified the key issue at paragraphs 40-43 that while the  report
         may have been genuine that did not mean the contents of the  report
         were true and the Judge was required to assess that in the  context
         of all of the evidence.

      h) The Judge set out the issue of state protection at 60-62  but  also
         looked at relocation

 8. In reply Ms Sachdev on behalf of the Appellant submitted

      a) There was no requirement for corroboration in an asylum claim.

      b) In relation to the trial in London the Judge  did  not  assess  the
         impact of the loss of the High Court case and  the  fact  that  the
         company had ceased trading and would not have Government support.



The Law

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken no account of evidence that was not before him.

10. Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.



Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those submissions I/we reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this  in  relation
    to challenging findings in the way that is outlined in the  grounds  of
    appeal in this case:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

13. In a detailed and carefully analysed  decision  the  Judge  set  out  a
    succinct but accurate summary of the Appellants case at paragraphs  5-9
    and he sets out at  paragraph  7  the  further  developments  that  had
    occurred since his arrival in the UK that the Appellant  claimed  added
    to his risk so I do not accept that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
    account both the risk arising out of events in  Sierra  Leone  or  what
    happened after the Appellant left the country.

14. As to the application of the standard of proof the Judge  set  out  the
    law at 10-18. In a lengthy decision I do not find that the use  of  the
    words 'hard' or 'concrete' in relation to the nature  of  the  evidence
    suggests that the Judge  has  lost  sight  of  the  standard  of  proof
    particularly when the  context  in  which  those  words  are  used.  In
    relation to the first the Judge notes that  while  a  number  of  other
    people in AML were witnesses on behalf of the company 'there is no hard
    evidence that I have seen to suggest that any came to any harm.' He  is
    entitled to note that while the Appellant asserted  another  member  of
    his team was dead there was no evidence of this  in  the  form  of  for
    example a death  certificate.  The  fact  that  corroboration  was  not
    required did not mean that a Judge is required to leave out of  account
    the  absence  of  documentary  evidence,  which  could  reasonably   be
    expected. While the use of the words hard or concrete may be colloquial
    and inelegant it would have been open to him to  note  the  absence  of
    other documentary evidence of events that might reasonably be  expected
    to be provable in a document.

15. The context in which the Judge used the word 'concrete' in paragraph 54
    was that the Appellant had given no concrete evidence of  any  specific
    threats or attacks on him. Given that the issue of risk both subjective
    and objective was at the heart of the case this was a finding that  was
    open to the Judge.

16. In essence the Judge acknowledged that the Appellant  was  a  reluctant
    witness for AML and this led to the local community being very  unhappy
    with him .He  found that the Appellant had a subjective  fear  that  he
    was at risk he concluded  that  this  fear  was  not  objectively  well
    founded and he gave numerous reasons for that  finding  including  that
    the nature of the threats even on the Appellants account was vague  and
    unspecific (paragraphs 26,27,37,38) and that it public  knowledge  that
    he had made a  statement  on  behalf  of  the  company  and  while  the
    community were 'angry' nothing was done to him (paragraph  25)

17. He took into account the evidence of Mr Daboh in detail (paragraphs 28-
    35)He was entitled to note that Mr Daboh was a  poor  witness  who  was
    equally vague about the nature of the threats  (paragraph  29)  and  to
    find it incredible that  although he claimed that his home was attacked
    by stone throwers he had not sought to move his family from their  home
    (paragraph 33) and that after his involvement as a witness became known
    and he had continued to work for 3 months for AML nothing  happened  to
    him (paragraph 33) and he was entitled to note that when  he  moved  to
    Freetown he was not traced there and had no more problems(paragraph 35)
    He was entitled to conclude that in  relation  therefore  to  the  risk
    faced by the Appellant  he  placed  little  weight  on  this  witnesses
    evidence  and  weight  is  a  matter  for  him  in   the   absence   of
    irrationality.

18. In relation to the article  in  a  national  newspaper  suggesting  the
    Appellants life was under threat. It was open to the Judge  to  draw  a
    distinction between the article being a genuine  article  in  a  'real'
    newspaper which he appears to accept taking into account  the  evidence
    of Dr Bolton but he is right to point out that she conflates that  with
    the question of whether the article had any basis in truth(paragraph 42-
    43). It was open to him to find that this had to be looked  at  in  the
    context of all the evidence : in that context he was entitled  to  take
    into account the absence of evidence of the source of  the  information
    in the article and why such an article was reported on the  front  page
    of a national newspaper in the middle of a national  crisis  (paragraph
    40) ; that while others provided witness statements on behalf of AML it
    was incredible that there  was  no  suggestion  of  anyone  else  being
    threatened (paragraph 41) and the Appellants own evidence was  that  no
    threats or attacks had been directed at  him  when  he  was  in  Sierra
    Leone.

19. The Judge also assessed the case on the basis that he could not  return
    to his home area, looking at internal relocation  as  he  accepts  that
    given community feeling he would be  unwelcome.  I  do  not  accept  he
    reached conclusions before looking at Dr Bolton's evidence as he states
    quite clearly at paragraph 48 that the conclusions he reached were made
    having read Dr Bolton's report. He was entitled to note that Dr Bolton,
    who is being advanced as an objective expert, should not respond to the
    question about the  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation  or  state
    protection by stating 'Honestly  I  laughed  when  I  first  read  this
    question.'  He  notes  that  in  expressing  her  opinion  about  state
    protection she showed no awareness  of  the  Horvath  test.  These  are
    matters which he is entitled to take into account  in  determining  the
    weight he gave her opinions. He dealt with  her  report  in  detail  at
    paragraphs 48-61. Ms Sachdev criticises the Judge for  suggesting  that
    she makes no reference to source material but  acknowledges  that  this
    may have arisen because of the unhelpful way the report was written  in
    that she answered a number of questions posed by Ms  Sachdev  and  then
    at pages 264-346 attaches a number of articles she wrote  about  issues
    that appear to be unrelated to internal relocation  but  which  contain
    references to sources. If Dr Bolton's evidence is unpersuasive  because
    it is in parts unprofessional and poorly presently the Judge cannot  be
    criticised for giving it less weight. The Judge  himself  assessed  the
    issue of internal relocation by reference to all of the issues relevant
    to the test of whether it was reasonable in the context of the opinions
    expressed : his lengthy work experience; the fact that the threats even
    on his evidence were from members of a small  local  community  and  he
    could move to Freetown which was 175km away; that Mr Daboh moved  there
    and was untraced.

20. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by the
    Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

         "The duty to give reasons requires that  reasons  must  be  proper,
         intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court
         in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
         dispute in the present case relates to the last of those  elements,
         that is the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
         decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more
         and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less should
         it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the  reasons  for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

21. I am satisfied that when this decision  is  read  as  a  whole  reached
    conclusions that were  reasonably  open  to  him  based  on  a  careful
    assessment of all of the evidence including that of the  Appellant,  Dr
    Bolton and Mr Daboh and his approach to  that  evidence  was  justified
    based on the reasons he gave.




CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.



DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
24.8.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
