
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11701/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2019                            |On 18 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     mFG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms G Brown (Counsel)


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   It will be convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  MFG is the appellant and the Secretary  of  State
    the respondent.  In a decision promulgated on 29th November 2018, First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal against refusal of his protection claim.   The  appellant  is  a
    minor and a citizen of Afghanistan.   In  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal, it is  contended  but  the  Judge
    erred in failing to give adequate reasons for his conclusion  that  the
    appeal fell to be allowed on asylum grounds and  also  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.  The  reasons  are  described  in  the  grounds  as
    contradictory, the Judge accepting that there was a lack of  detail  in
    the appellant's case.  It is contended that the Judge failed to explain
    how the appellant made out his case  that  he  was  at  risk  from  the
    Taliban or ISIS.  General reasons given at paragraphs 12 to 15  of  the
    decision were conflated with reasons that might be more appropriate  to
    a grant of humanitarian protection.  Overall, the Judge  failed  to  be
    precise in identifying the basis on which he  allowed  the  appeal  and
    failed to explain how the appellant made out his case.

2.   In a Rule 24 response prepared on the appellant's behalf by  Ms  Brown,
    the decision is described as free from material error.   The  appellant
    faced problems as a result of men coming to his home after  his  father
    lost his job with the Afghan Government.  The appellant's  brother  was
    taken away and killed.  After the funeral, the men  came  on  two  more
    occasions  to  continue  to  harass  and  ill-treat  the  family.   The
    appellant and close relatives left some two weeks  later.   He  was  13
    years old at the time and had no  knowledge  of  the  reasons  for  the
    visits or why  they  started  after  his  father  lost  his  job.   The
    appellant lost contact with his family.  He believes that  he  is  from
    the Hazara ethnic group and that this may be the reason or part of  the
    reason for the ill-treatment he and his family suffered.

3.   The Judge correctly found that the appellant was 13 years  old  at  the
    time of the events and  was  satisfied  that  he  had  established  his
    account of the troubles that befell his family.   Those  findings  were
    adequately reasoned.  At paragraph 15 of the decision, the Judge turned
    to  a  different  matter  and  considered  the  issue  of  the  Refugee
    Convention reason that applied, rather than the lack of detail  in  the
    appellant's claim.  There was no contradiction.   The  Judge's  reasons
    for allowing the appeal were clear and obvious.  Although  he  referred
    to the Refugee Convention reason not being formulated with  any  degree
    of certainty, he had in mind the appellant's lack  of  knowledge  about
    the reasons for the persecution of his family.

Oral Submissions

4.   Mr Avery said that the decision showed  a  lack  of  reasoning  by  the
    Judge.  The appellant was unable to provide any specifics  in  relation
    to his account of events.  The Judge accepted the general  account  but
    paragraph 15 of the decision was, with  respect,  hard  to  understand.
    The Judge appeared to be concerned that the Refugee  Convention  reason
    could not be identified but went on to find that one was shown  anyway.
    There was no reasoning in relation to the risk of persecution.

5.    Ms  Brown  responded  that  the  decision  was  short  but  adequately
    reasoned.  The Judge had the  lack  of  detail  clearly  in  mind.   At
    paragraph 10 of the decision he referred to the skeleton argument which
    was before him and the paragraphs there  stressing  the  importance  of
    taking into account the appellant's young age.  The appellant  recalled
    that the men harassed his family and took his brother but he was unable
    to say why this happened.  The guidance referred  to  in  the  skeleton
    argument, including from UNHCR, shows that  children  might  well  have
    difficulties in recalling events.  Those difficulties could not support
    a conclusion that they could not succeed in Refugee Convention  claims.
    Children who could not articulate reasons for events  might  be  simply
    unable to succeed in protection claims if that were so.

6.   So far as paragraph 15 was concerned,  the  appellant's  case  was  not
    expressly pleaded on the basis that he was entitled both to asylum  and
    to humanitarian protection.   The  Judge  properly  took  into  account
    relevant guidance bearing on the assessment of the  appellant's  claims
    and found that he could fall within a "particular social group"  as  an
    unaccompanied minor.

Findings on Error of Law

7.   The decision has been prepared by  a  very  experienced  Judge  and  Ms
    Brown is right to say that it does not suffer from prolixity  or  undue
    length.  However, it is not possible to find in the decision  reasoning
    which rationally supports the Judge's finding at paragraph 13 that  the
    appellant "is a refugee in his  home  city  of  Samangan".   The  Judge
    properly took  into  account  guidance  regarding  the  care  which  is
    required in assessing asylum claims made by  children.   He  accurately
    recorded the appellant's  account  of  men  harassing  the  family  and
    killing his brother and his acceptance that he could not say  what  the
    reasons were for the harassment and ill-treatment.   At  paragraph  15,
    the Judge moved to consider which of the available  Refugee  Convention
    reasons applied in the  case.   The  fundamental  difficulty  is  this:
    missing from the decision are  clear  findings  of  fact  supporting  a
    conclusion that there is a real risk of persecution on return.

8.   The Judge accepted the appellant's account as being  reasonably  likely
    to be true but there is no analysis of the nature of  the  threat  from
    the men and no assessment of risk from them, or from  anyone  else,  on
    return to the appellant's home area.  Of course,  the  absence  of  any
    detail regarding the identity  of  the  men,  their  motives  or  their
    influence would not of itself prevent a conclusion that a real risk was
    shown but more reasoning was required to explain how the asylum grounds
    of appeal were made out.

9.   The Judge did not err in  taking  into  account  submissions  from  the
    appellant's Counsel regarding the need for a careful assessment and  he
    properly took into account at least a part of the relevant case law, in
    paragraph 12 of the decision.

10.  Even if the appellant were able to show a real risk of  persecution  in
    his home area, what would be required next  is  an  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of relocation, the destination of  return  being  Kabul.
    The Judge recorded the appellant's case that he cannot not live in  the
    capital as he has never been there and has no family in the city.  When
    he first arrived in the United Kingdom, he  indicated  that  he  is  of
    Tajik ethnicity but Afghans he has met in this country  have  told  him
    that he is Hazara.  All of that would bear on an assessment  of  return
    to Kabul but the decision contains no clear findings  or  reasoning  on
    this issue.

11.  Turning next to paragraph 15 of the decision, Mr Avery  drew  attention
    to the Judge's view that the lack of detail in the case meant  that  it
    was not possible to identify the applicable Refugee  Convention  reason
    with any degree of certainty.  Nonetheless, the Judge went on to accept
    a submission that the appellant is a  member  of  a  particular  social
    group: unaccompanied minors from Afghanistan.   However,  even  if  the
    appellant does fall within this category, this is only one part of  the
    overall analysis which is required.    There  is  a  lack  of  reasoned
    findings in relation to the risk of persecution in the appellant's home
    area and the reasonableness of relocation to Kabul.

12.  The Secretary of State's  grounds  identify  a  further  error  in  the
    Judge's conclusion that the appellant succeeds in relation to both  his
    asylum grounds and his claim to be entitled to humanitarian protection.
     The last sentence of paragraph 15 shows that the Judge did indeed fall
    into error in this way.  If a person succeeds in showing that he or she
    is a refugee, he or she is not  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection.
    Humanitarian protection is only available to a claimant who  is  not  a
    refugee.  This is made clear in the rules at paragraph 339C(ii).

13.  Overall, the decision contains material errors of law and must  be  set
    aside.  The appropriate venue for remaking the decision is  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, in view of the extent of the fact-finding that  will  be
    required.   The remaking will proceed on  a  de  novo  basis,  with  no
    findings preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  as  containing  a
material error or errors of law.   It  will  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal, before a Judge other than Judge Devittie.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


Anonymity

The  anonymity  direction  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  shall
continue, until discharged or varied by this Tribunal  or  another  Tribunal
or court.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 12 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



