
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11401/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2018                             |On 26th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                    m.r.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, in-house Counsel at Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Colvin dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision
    to refuse to grant asylum and humanitarian protection.  The decision of
    Judge Colvin was promulgated on 28th December 2017.  The Appellant  was
    granted permission  to  appeal  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison.  The grounds  upon  which  permission  was  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows:

         "It is arguable that the  judge  has  misdirected  himself  (a)  by
         failing to take into account that the Appellant's father has 2  24-
         hour  bodyguards  at  home  when  assessing  the  credibility   and
         plausibility of the Appellant's account as regards to  the  threats
         that had been made against his father; (b) by failing to take  into
         account the letter from the President of the BNP Beanibazar Upazila
         Branch, Sylet or  an  affidavit  from  [BU],  a  neighbour  of  the
         Appellant's father affirming that persons  from  the  Awami  League
         ruling party have come to the house of the  Appellant's  father  to
         search for him so forcing the father to leave the  house  for  long
         periods which, along with other evidence supports  the  Appellant's
         core claim that his father is locally active in  the  BNP  and  has
         been subject to harassment by the Awami League;  (c)  although  the
         court documents filed against the Appellant's father may be complex
         and difficult to follow in detail, this should not stop  the  judge
         in failing to engage properly with the documents which support  the
         Appellant's account that his father is being so targeted."

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the Respondent  as  one
    was not produced for the purposes of this appeal.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of submissions, I indicated I found an error of  law  such
    that the decision should be  set  aside,  but  that  my  reasons  would
    follow.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 4. As indicated at the close of the hearing, I did find that there was  an
    error of law. I will deal with the grounds in the order they  arise  to
    illustrate my reasons.  In  respect  of  Ground  1  the  Appellant,  as
    summarised above, contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  accepted
    that the Appellant's father was a successful businessman in Sylhet  who
    employed two guards at the family home (see paragraph 27).  It was also
    highlighted that the First-tier Judge had acknowledged that  background
    evidence presented showed that there  was  evidence  of  kidnapping  by
    criminal gangs of  the  children  of  wealthy  businessmen  for  ransom
    purposes (see paragraphs 20, 25 and 26 of the decision).  This evidence
    was contained at page 92 of tab 2 of the bundle.  Given these  findings
    as they appear on the face of the decision it does appear that there is
    an omission in the judge's consideration in that  although  the  First-
    tier Judge did not accept that the  father  was  a  politically  active
    member of the BNP (Bangladesh National Party), the consequence  of  the
    judge's findings required the judge to therefore consider  whether  the
    ultimate scenario of the judge being a successful businessman  and  the
    Appellant being his child would result in a risk to  the  Appellant  on
    return to Bangladesh  as  a  consequence  of  kidnapping  motivated  by
    financial purposes.  Whilst this ground does represent an  omission  it
    would not have been sufficient in of itself to demonstrate  a  material
    error of law such that the decision  should  be  set  aside.   However,
    there were two further grounds pleaded which I shall now consider.

 5. Turning to Ground 2, the Appellant  contends  that,  in  rejecting  the
    father's claim to not be a locally prominent member of  the  opposition
    Bangladesh National Party in the Beanibazar  district  of  Sylhet,  the
    First-tier Judge has  failed  to  take  into  account  the  documentary
    evidence  before  the  Tribunal  which  evidenced  that  fact  and  the
    difficulties that the father  currently  faces.   Thus,  in  short  the
    Appellant criticises the statement at paragraph 27 of the decision that
    there was no  independent  evidence  showing  that  the  father  was  a
    politician of some prominence in that district and the rejection of the
    claim that he has a high profile in the BNP or is politically active as
    claimed  (see  paragraph  28  of  the  decision).   Specifically,   the
    Appellant complains that a letter  from  the  president  of  the  local
    branch was not taken into consideration.  This letter can  be  seen  at
    page 9, tab 1 of the Appellant's bundle and is  on  letterheaded  paper
    and purports to be from the president of that branch.  I find  that  on
    the face of the decision that letter was not considered by  the  judge,
    nor findings made upon it.  Secondly, the Appellant complains  that  an
    affidavit from the family's neighbour, namely, [BU], was also not taken
    into account in that it corroborated  the  father's  evidence  and  the
    Appellant's account and was endorsed before an advocate  and  therefore
    warranted  consideration  before  the  claim  concerning  the  father's
    profile  could  be  rejected.   Again  this  document  does  not   find
    consideration in the judge's findings and as such I do find that  there
    is an error in respect of Ground 2.

 6. Turning to Ground 3, the final complaint made is that the judge  failed
    to engage properly or at all with the content of many  court  documents
    that  were  provided.   Although  the  judge  notes  the  documents  at
    paragraph 25 of the decision, it is true to say that the judge has  not
    considered those documents in terms of their content or  their  context
    or whether those documents were indeed genuine and/or reliable for  the
    purposes of enhancing the Appellant's claim before a finding  was  made
    that the claim was not made out on the evidence  before  the  Tribunal.
    Consequently, given this glaring omission, in respect of what  purports
    to be key documentary evidence supporting the  father's  profile  as  a
    politically active local member of the BNP, I do find that this  ground
    is also made out and represents an error of law.

 7. Given the three grounds above have been made out, I do find that  there
    is a material error of law such that the decision is flawed.

 8. In light of the above findings, I set aside the decision  and  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal entirely.

Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

10. The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  errors  on
    points of law and is set aside.

11. The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by
    a differently constituted bench.

12. The First-tier Tribunal's anonymity direction is maintained.


Signed                                  Date 22/03/2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
