
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11263/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 17 September 2019                 |On 23 September 2019                  |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     H W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. J. Fraczyk, Counsel, instructed by IMK
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

  1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
     Thomas ('the Judge'), issued on 22 July 2019, by which the  appellant's
     appeal against a decision of the respondent  to  refuse  to  grant  her
     international protection was dismissed.

  2. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Neville  granted  permission  on  all
     grounds.

Anonymity

  3. I am mindful of Guidance Note  2013,  No.1.  concerned  with  anonymity
     orders and I observe that  the  starting  point  for  consideration  of
     anonymity orders in this Chamber of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  as  in  all
     courts and tribunals, is open justice. However, I note paragraph 13  of
     the Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is the present practice
     of both the First-tier Tribunal and this  Tribunal  that  an  anonymity
     order is made in all appeals  raising  asylum  or  other  international
     protection claims.

  4. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
     2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
     or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
     form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
     appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, the appellant and
     the respondent. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
     rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so  in  order  to  avoid  a
     likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from  the  contents
     of the protection claim becoming publicly known.



Background

  5. The appellant is a national of Morocco. She asserts that whilst  living
     in Morocco  she  resided  with  her  family,  a  number  of  whom  have
     connections to the Moroccan military and police. In  2011  she  met  an
     Albanian national, Mr. F, who lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  was
     holidaying in Morocco.  Because  her  family  did  not  permit  her  to
     socialise with men she continued to meet  Mr.  F.  in  secret  when  he
     visited Morocco. Eventually, after a passage of  time  Mr.  F  met  the
     appellant's family and he secured the  permission  of  the  appellant's
     father to marry her.

  6. In July 2015 the appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor,
     intending to stay her paternal uncle.  The  appellant's  intention,  in
     part, was to discuss her future with Mr. F. The couple progressed their
     relationship into a physical one. The appellant  stopped  communicating
     with her family in Morocco. Over time the  appellant  became  more  and
     more suspicious as to Mr. F's true intentions. He  became  evasive  and
     made excuses as to future plans. He  also  explained  that  he  had  to
     resolve problems before  he  could  marry  her.  The  appellant  became
     pregnant in or around November 2017 and informed Mr. F that they should
     marry as her family would consider it as a disgrace for  her  to  be  a
     mother outside wedlock. Mr.  F  arranged  for  an  Iman  to  conduct  a
     marriage ceremony and the Iman demanded  evidence  of  the  appellant's
     virginity. Without receiving such assurance, he refused to conduct  the
     ceremony. Mr.  F  placed  the  appellant  under  pressure  to  have  an
     abortion. He made threats to her. She was scared and  so  went  through
     with the abortion. The relationship deteriorated and the appellant  was
     subjected to physical abuse. Mr.  F  then  informed  her  that  he  was
     married to a  British  citizen  in  this  country,  from  whom  he  had
     separated, and they had a child. He also had a wife in Algeria  through
     an Islamic marriage, and they had a child. He  told  the  appellant  to
     leave the house, refusing  to  permit  her  to  take  her  clothes  and
     documents. He then phoned her family in Morocco and informed them  that
     she was not a virgin. He stated that the appellant had  been  dating  a
     lot of men in this country and had  several  boyfriends.  Subsequently,
     the appellant received a voicemail from her father informing  her  that
     she would be killed if she returned home. She  also  received  messages
     from her father and brother making similar threats.

  7. The appellant claimed asylum in February 2018. The  respondent  refused
     her application for international protection by way of a decision dated
     12 September 2018.

  8. Meanwhile, in March 2018, the appellant met a Zimbabwean national and a
     relationship began which lasted 8 months. The appellant was  assaulted,
     bringing the relationship to an end. She  relies  upon  several  police
     documents arising from her complaint as to physical assault.



Hearing before the FtT

  9. The appeal came before the Judge at Birmingham on  13  June  2019.  The
     appellant detailed the core of her claim in a witness statement,  dated
     12 December 2018.

         'I can't return to Morocco because I am no longer a virgin  and  my
         father and brother now know this. They will surely kill me.'

         'I can't live elsewhere in Morocco because no one will accept me. I
         can't marry because I am not  a  virgin.  I  will  have  no  family
         support. In my culture, a woman can't live alone, especially  if  I
         am single. I  will  be  discriminated  against  in  work,  housing,
         education, socially, everything.  I  have  no  skills.  I  will  be
         ostracized and destitute. I can't work because my father has all my
         documents and I need these documents to work.'

         'My father will find me. He is well known in many places in Morocco
         because [...] He will kill me  for  the  shame  I  brought  to  the
         family. I will be exploited, and everyone will try to use my  lowly
         position. It will make everyone greedy to exploit me as I will  get
         no respect. I will be exposed to physical abuse and mental abuse if
         I don't agree with their demands. I can't live like that. I'd  kill
         myself.'

 10. Ms. T, a friend, attended the hearing and gave evidence. The  appellant
     also relied upon a country expert opinion authored by Dr.  Katja  Zvan-
     Elliott, an associate professor in political science/ North African and
     Middle East  Studies  at  Al  Khawayn  University,  Morocco.  She  also
     provided transcripts of messages received from her father.

 11. The Judge found the appellant to be an incredible  witness  as  to  her
     history and so found that she did not possess a  well-founded  fear  of
     persecution in Morocco. She further found that the appellant was unable
     to satisfy the requirements of article 8 both under and outside of  the
     Immigration Rules.



Grounds of appeal

 12. The appellant relies  upon  grounds  drafted  by  Ms.  Rutherford,  who
     represented her before the First-tier Tribunal.  At  their  heart,  the
     grounds complain that the Judge erred in law  by  failing  to  consider
     relevant evidence presented to the Tribunal.

 13. In granting permission to appeal, JFtT Neville observed at [2] and [3]:

         'The grounds first assert that the Judge erred in failing  to  have
         regard  to,  or  misunderstanding,  several  identified  evidential
         considerations. I turn first to those argued at paragraphs 5 and  6
         of the Grounds. The appellant's claim included a relationship  with
         a man called [Mr. F]. At [26-29] the Judge  noted  the  appellant's
         claim  that  her  father  was  a  strict  Muslim  with   high-level
         connections, and that as a result 'it is  not  credible'  that  she
         could have had the relationship with [Mr. F] that she claimed,  nor
         is it 'credible' that her father  would  permit  the  appellant  to
         travel to the UK alone or that it was 'logical  or  credible'  that
         she would have come to the UK to plan a  wedding  that  would  take
         place in Morocco.

         Given the need for caution when relying  upon  plausibility  as  an
         adverse indicator  of  credibility,  and  no  other  factors  being
         identified by the Judge when rejecting this part  of  the  account,
         the grounds' assertion that fairness required at least some reasons
         why alternative explanations  had  been  rejected  is  sufficiently
         arguable to elevate the application beyond a mere quarrel with  the
         facts. This is in addition to the alternative argument that in  the
         following   paragraphs   the   Judge   may    have    impermissibly
         compartmentalised  her  assessment  of  credibility,  as  cautioned
         against in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367. All grounds may be argued.'

 14. No rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.



The hearing

 15. Both representatives at  the  hearing  informed  me  that  the  parties
     considered the Judge's decision to be flawed by legal error  such  that
     it should be set aside.



Decision on error of law

 16. Ms. Rutherford in her grounds and Mr. Fracyzk by way  of  his  skeleton
     argument  make  several  complaints  as  to  the  Judge's  approach  to
     credibility, in particular the finding made at [26] as to  the  ongoing
     nature of the appellant's relationship with Mr. F. in Morocco:

         'The appellant lives in Rabat-Sale  in  Morocco  with  her  father,
         brothers and sister. Her family are Muslims and strict. Her  father
         [...] and previously served in the  military.  Her  paternal  uncle
         works with the monarchy as an  officer  and  her  two  cousins  are
         bodyguards to the monarchy. Her family members  have  contact  with
         other people in different cities. Against this background,  I  find
         it is not credible that the appellant  met  [Mr.  F]  in  2011  and
         continued having  telephone  contact  and  meetings  with  him,  by
         leaving her job hours earlier and crossing the bridge to  Rabat  to
         meet him in public places, regularly over a period of  four  years,
         without any of her claimed influential family members finding out.'

 17. The Judge further observed as to the appellant having travelled to this
     country at [27] and [28]:

         'Given the strictness of the appellant's father, I find it  is  not
         credible he would permit the appellant to travel to the  UK  alone,
         as an engaged woman, to visit her uncle and to meet with her fianc�
         [Mr. F].

         It is not logical or credible, (sic) the appellant  would  come  to
         the UK to plan a wedding intended to take place in Morocco.'

 18. A striking aspect of these three paragraphs is  that  the  Judge  makes
     significant  adverse  credibility  findings  on  key   issues   without
     providing any reasoning as to why such findings  are  made  beyond  the
     evidence presented  not  being  logical  or  credible.  These  are  not
     reasons. They are simply assertions.

 19. The Judge then proceeds to determine at [29]:

         'Given my findings thus far, I do not find the appellant is from  a
         strict religious family in Morocco. The fact  she  was  allowed  to
         work and travel alone in Morocco, remain unmarried at  the  age  of
         30; and travel as a visitor to the UK alone, indicates she is  from
         a more liberal family.'

 20. It is not the appellant's case as presented by way of this  claim  that
     her family  are  religiously  extreme.  Rather,  upon  considering  her
     evidence in  the  round,  she  identifies  them  as  being  religiously
     observant and culturally conservative. She does not  identify  them  as
     being stricter, either in religion  or  culturally,  then  an  ordinary
     member of Moroccan society. It is apparent that the Judge has noted the
     respondent's observations at [53] and  [54]  of  the  decision  letter,
     namely purported references  in  the  appellant's  interview  that  the
     family 'live in a conservative community' and are 'very religious'  and
     has proceeded to find that  the  family  are  strict  as  to  religion.
     However,  upon  inspection  of  the  interview,  the  appellant  simply
     confirmed that her family are 'religious' at Q38, not 'very religious',
     as asserted by the respondent in her decision  letter.  This  error  of
     fact as to the appellant's case adversely  flows  through  the  Judge's
     decision.

 21. Consequent to her findings at [27] to [29], which I have identified  as
     erroneous in law, the Judge proceeded to determine at [30]:

         'Given my findings thus far, I do not  find  the  appellant  had  a
         relationship with [Mr. F] in Morocco or that she was  engaged  with
         him.'

 22. Having dismissed a core element  of  the  appellant's  claim  in  three
     paragraphs,  running  to  a  total  of  nine  lines,  without  adequate
     reasoning, the Judge proceeded to consider  in  greater  detail  as  to
     whether the appellant had a relationship with Mr. F. in  this  country.
     However, such  consideration  is  infected  with  the  flawed  findings
     previously made, because the  adverse  findings  as  to  the  long-term
     relationship in Morocco, the travelling to this country to meet up with
     Mr. F and their engagement are at the heart of  the  appellant's  claim
     and cannot be disengaged  from  the  subsequent  consideration  of  the
     appellant's  relationship  with  Mr.  F  in  this  country.   In   such
     circumstances, the errors of law are material.

 23. The Judge seeks to consider the claim in the alternative  at  [39]  but
     then,  strikingly,  proceeds  to  fail  to   undertake   any   adequate
     consideration of the expert opinion before her. The opinion is referred
     to merely in  passing,  referenced  as  a  'report',  with  the  simple
     observation as to having been 'considered'.  No  further  reference  is
     made to it and the Judge proceeds to find at [39]:

         '... The appellant had employment in Morocco prior to coming to the
         UK, and worked, albeit unlawfully in the UK. There is  no  evidence
         she would not be able to secure future employment in  Morocco.  The
         country offers sufficiency of protection. There  are  shelters  for
         those who suffer domestic violence and a number of supporting  non-
         governmental  organisations.  In  these  circumstances,  whilst   I
         recognise the appellant may experience a level of discrimination, I
         do not find she is likely to be destitute or exposed to a  risk  of
         serious harm or treatment of a level  to  breach  article  3  ECHR.
         Relocation in Morocco is not unreasonable or unduly harsh.'

 24. I have grave concerns as to the underlying process taken in making such
     findings of fact as they fail entirely to engage  with  expert  opinion
     before the Tribunal, which on certain issues addressed at [39]  are  in
     stark contrast to the findings of the Judge.

 25. It is trite that the consideration of an asylum claim, and a consequent
     appeal, should be undertaken with the 'most anxious scrutiny'. A  judge
     is required to carefully consider any expert  opinion  relied  upon  by
     either party before it. In this appeal the Judge ought properly to have
     been alive to the fact  that  Dr.  Zvan-Elliott  was  providing  expert
     evidence on the relevant legal regime existing in Morocco and also upon
     country circumstances, both of which would be expected to aid  a  judge
     considering an asylum appeal concerned with Morocco.

 26. I note that the Judge had before her Dr. Zvan-Elliott's  CV,  by  which
     she confirmed that she presently  works  in  Morocco  as  an  associate
     professor  and  has  supervised  undergraduate  and   graduate   theses
     concerned with sexuality,  gender-based  violence  and  Moroccan  legal
     reforms.  She  has  detailed  her  academic  work   including   various
     publications concerned with gender-based violence in  Morocco  and  the
     political rights of  women  in  Morocco.  I  observe  that  her  MPhil,
     undertaken at the University of Oxford, was concerned with the politics
     of the reform of family law in Morocco. In addition to her publications
     she has presented talks on gender-based violence in Morocco at  several
     universities in the USA and  also  at  the  University  of  Oxford  and
     Queen's University, Belfast. She opines that the appellant's fears  are
     objectively well-founded and that there is a  lack  of  protection  for
     women who suffer from domestic violence in Morocco  and  also  societal
     and employment discrimination for unmarried women who do not enjoy  the
     support of their father.

 27. The failure to adequately consider the report, or even to make a  basic
     finding as to whether Dr. Zvan-Elliott is an expert, is  a  significant
     error of law.

 28. It is well-established that the evidence of an expert witness is not to
     be rejected lightly: Karanakaran v. Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
     Department [2000] Imm AR 271.  Dr.  Zvan-Elliott's  qualifications  and
     expertise were not challenged by the respondent at the hearing. It  was
     therefore  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to  assess  Dr.  Zvan-Elliott's
     expertise and if satisfied that she was an expert as to  the  issue  or
     issues before the Tribunal, to assess the nature  and  context  of  the
     expert evidence presented.

 29. The clearest statement of the basis on which a court or tribunal should
     permit expert testimony in a case is found in  the  judgment  of  Chief
     Justice King in the South Australian case of R  v  Bonython  (1984)  38
     SASR 45, 46 in which he set out a test with three limbs. The first  may
     be summarised as 'does the court  need  expert  evidence  to  reach  an
     informed conclusion?' The Judge was therefore required to  consider  as
     to whether  the  issue  or  issues  upon  which  Dr.  Zvan-Elliott  was
     instructed to opine are ones that require expert evidence. In my  view,
     they clearly are. The second limb may be  summarised  as  'is  there  a
     reliable body of specialist  knowledge?'  It  is  whether  the  subject
     matter of the opinion forms part of a body of knowledge  or  experience
     which is sufficiently organised or  recognised  to  be  accepted  as  a
     reliable body of knowledge or experience, a special  acquaintance  with
     which by the witness would render his or her opinion of  assistance  to
     the court. I find that Dr. Zvan-Elliott does  enjoy  such  acquaintance
     with the position of  Moroccan  women  who  have  had  sex  outside  of
     marriage and the sufficiency  of  protection  available  to  them  from
     hostile family members, a clearly identifiable subject. The third  limb
     may be summarised as 'is the  particular  witness  an  expert  in  that
     field?' I observe that the consideration undertaken by this limb is  as
     to whether the expert witness  has  acquired  by  study  or  experience
     sufficient knowledge of the subject to render his  or  her  opinion  of
     value in resolving the issues before the court.

 30. The approach adopted in Bonython was approved by the Supreme  Court  in
     Kennedy v Cordia (Services) Ltd [2016] UKSC 6; [2016]  1  WLR  597,  at
     [43], where  Lord  Reed  and  Lord  Hodge  (on  behalf  of  the  Court)
     considered the evidence of skilled witnesses in  civil  proceedings  at
     [38] - [61]. The approach adopted to civil proceedings appears, for the
     purpose of this appeal, to  be  consistent  with  the  approach  to  be
     adopted in Tribunal proceedings. It was held that there  are  threshold
     questions as to the admissibility of expert evidence, [39], and at [41]
     it is noted that 'an expert in the social and political conditions in a
     foreign country who gives evidence to an immigration judge  also  gives
     skilled evidence of fact.' The Judge was therefore required  to  assess
     as to whether a witness, Dr. Zvan-Elliott, purporting to be an 'expert'
     providing skilled evidence of fact, actually  possesses  the  necessary
     knowledge and experience, [44]. The possession of  such  knowledge  and
     experience was addressed by the Supreme Court at [50]:

         'The skilled witness must demonstrate to the court that he  or  she
         has relevant  knowledge  and  experience  to  give  either  factual
         evidence, which is not based exclusively on personal observation or
         sensation,  or  opinion  evidence.  Where   the   skilled   witness
         establishes such knowledge and experience, he or she  can  draw  on
         the general body of knowledge and  understanding  of  the  relevant
         expertise: Myers v. The Queen [2015] 3 WLR 1145, para. 63.'

 31. Having carefully considered her qualifications and research  history  I
     find that Dr. Zvan-Elliott  satisfies  the  requirement  that  she  has
     acquired  by  study  or  experience  sufficient  knowledge  as  to  the
     availability of protection for women in Morocco from their families who
     believe they have dishonoured the family to render her opinion of value
     in resolving issues in this appeal. Therefore, she is an expert on  the
     issues before the Tribunal. In such  circumstances,  I  find  that  the
     failure by the Judge to consider such expert  opinion  was  a  material
     error of law and so the respondent cannot rely upon  the  Judge  having
     considered the appeal in  the  alternative  to  preserve  it  from  the
     material errors of law detailed above.



Re-making the decision

 32. Both representatives confirmed at the hearing that if I were to find  a
     material error of law, I could re-make the decision without requiring a
     further hearing. The appellant and her witness, Ms. T, gave evidence at
     the hearing on 13 June 2019, some three months  ago  and  the  evidence
     provided was recorded by the Judge. I have  considered  the  record  of
     proceedings. There is no new evidence post-dating the decision  of  the
     First-tier Tribunal that requires my consideration.

 33. The burden  of  proof  falls  upon  the  appellant.  It  suffices  that
     substantial grounds have to be shown that there is a  real  risk  or  a
     reasonable degree of likelihood of the appellant suffering  persecution
     in Morocco for one of the reasons cited in the 1951  UN  Convention  on
     the Status of Refugees: RT (Zimbabwe) v. Secretary  of  State  for  the
     Home Department [2012] UKSC 38; [2012] 3 WLR  345,  at  [55].  For  the
     purpose of humanitarian protection, the appellant must establish to the
     same standard that she would face a  real  risk  of  suffering  serious
     harm.

 34. In relation to the assessment of past events, I have reminded myself of
     the judgments of Brooke and Sedley LJJ in Karanakaran v.  Secretary  of
     State for the Home Department [2000] EWCA Civ 11; [2003] 3 All ER  449,
     particularly at 469f and  479d-f,  and  as  to  Sir  John  Dyson  JSC's
     consideration of the standard of proof in MA (Somalia) v. Secretary  of
     State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 49; [2011] 2 All  ER  65,  at
     [12] - [20].

 35. The appellant has set out a detailed and plausible history of  meeting,
     falling in love with and becoming engaged to a man she  met  whilst  he
     was holidaying in Morocco.  The  history  as  presented  is  internally
     consistent. Observing the cultural and  religious  observances  of  her
     parents, that I accept are  consistent  with  the  general,  prevailing
     observances in  Morocco,  and  noting  that  the  respondent's  primary
     challenge to this element  of  her  history  is  the  mistaken  factual
     understanding as to the strictness of the family's religious beliefs, I
     find to the lower standard that the appellant met and then commenced  a
     relationship with Mr. F as explained by her. I accept that  whilst  the
     relationship was initially kept secret from the appellant's  family  at
     the outset in 2011, by 2015 the appellant was confident to be  able  to
     introduce Mr. F to her family and  for  her  hand  in  marriage  to  be
     requested. As far as the appellant and her family were aware, Mr. F was
     a practicing Muslim who was eligible for marriage.

 36. Again, being mindful of the requisite standard of proof, I accept  that
     the appellant  travelled  to  this  country  with  several  intentions,
     including meeting Mr. F and  furthering  their  wedding  plans.  Whilst
     there is a discrepancy in her evidence as to  how  long  she  initially
     stayed with her uncle in this country, I note that the inconsistency is
     in  terms  of  weeks  and  not  months.  I  therefore  find  that  this
     inconsistency does not undermine the appellant's general credibility. I
     further note that Mr. F resides and works in the United Kingdom and  so
     it is plausible that the couple would wish to spend  time  together  in
     this country and discuss  future  plans.  I  further  accept  that  the
     relationship became physically intimate in this country  and  that  the
     appellant remained here so as to reside  with  her  fianc�.  I  further
     accept that her contact with her family  diminished  and  then  stopped
     over time because she did not want to explain that she was living  with
     Mr. F outside of marriage. Whilst the appellant  continued  to  believe
     that the relationship was strengthening, Mr. F's  commitment  began  to
     wane over time  and  the  relationship  was  deeply  fractured  by  the
     appellant's pregnancy and termination, which I accept to the  requisite
     standard as having occurred.  I further accept that it was around  this
     time that Mr. F informed the appellant that he was already married to a
     woman in this country and also had a wife by way of Islamic marriage in
     Tunisia. I find the breakdown of the relationship being accompanied  by
     physical violence and hostility to  have  been  credibly  explained  in
     detail by the appellant.

 37. I have carefully considered as to whether Mr. F. communicated a  number
     of unsubstantiated allegations to the  appellant's  family  as  to  the
     appellant having been sexually promiscuous in this country  leading  to
     the making of serious threats of harm. The  appellant's  evidence  that
     Mr. F, a regular visitor to Morocco, informed her family that  she  had
     been sexually promiscuous in this  country,  frequenting  with  several
     boyfriends, is plausible and is supported by Ms. T, whose evidence  was
     not challenged to any extent before First-tier Tribunal. Ms. T detailed
     in her evidence that she was initially a friend of Mr. F, having  known
     him for almost two decades and having grown up locally  with  him.  She
     came to know the appellant through her relationship with Mr. F.  Ms.  T
     took the appellant into her home in February 2018, after she  had  left
     Mr. F's home. Ms. T observed that the appellant  had  signs  of  having
     been beaten and she was fearful for her safety. I further note Ms.  T's
     evidence that she personally saw the appellant being visibly  upset  at
     having received a threatening voice messages from her father for having
     brought shame on the family. Ms. T continues to be a  friend  with  the
     appellant and has brought her long-term friendship with Mr. F to an end
     as a consequent of his actions.

 38. I have read the translations  of  text  messages  relied  upon  by  the
     appellant, which I accept were sent by her father, referencing that she
     is a 'slut', a 'whore' and that 'you have damaged my reputation as well
     as your brothers. You forget that you have a 19-year  old  sister.  Who
     will marry her, after what you did?' One message bluntly  states,  'you
     are lucky that you're not in Morocco. If we were there,  I  would  have
     slaughtered you and drunk your blood. From now on, never say you have a
     family in Morocco until you die, or we will  murder  you,  me  or  your
     brothers.' I accept from the clear tone of the messages that her father
     had clearly determined that she was to play no further part in the life
     of the extended family. The messages convey significant hostility.

 39. At this juncture, I consider Dr. Zvan-Elliott's opinion and  I  proceed
     having accepted her expertise in her field. At [31], she opines:

         '... Women are expected to behave in ways which preserve their  and
         their family's honour (by dressing modestly  and  not  engaging  in
         relationships with boys - both romantic and  non-romantic).  Losing
         virginity outside the  sanctity  of  marriage  or  getting  married
         without the presence and approval of the bride's tutor [fathers are
         legal tutors (wali), see [28]) are probably the most  dishonourable
         acts a woman can commit against her family's honour.'

 40. Considering the evidence in the round, I  find  that  Mr.  F  did  make
     adverse allegations to the appellant's close family as to the appellant
     being sexually improper in this country and that  her  family  believed
     that she had breached the boundaries of  social  mores  by  losing  her
     virginity in this country and conducting several sexual  relationships.
     I accept that having been informed that she was  sexually  promiscuous,
     the male members of her family believed  that  she  had  brought  great
     shame upon them and threatened her with  serious  violence.  I  further
     accept that the threats to kill were genuinely made. I accept that such
     views have not diminished in intensity over time. I therefore find that
     the appellant is at real risk of  serious  harm  from  members  of  her
     family, because of their  belief  as  to  her  having  dishonoured  the
     family.

 41. For the purpose of the 1951 Convention, I find that the appellant is  a
     member of a particular  social  group,  consequent  to  her  holding  a
     characteristic that is beyond her power to change,  namely  a  Moroccan
     woman who is considered by her family to have  brought  dishonour  upon
     them by sexual promiscuity outside of marriage  and  upon  whom  family
     members have threatened death to bring to an end such  dishonour:  Shah
     and Islam v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [1999]  2  A.C.
     629; [1999] 2 W.L.R. 1015

 42. However, that she is a member of a particular social group  is  not  by
     itself sufficient to permit the appellant to succeed on this appeal.  I
     am  required  to  consider  both  sufficiency  of  protection  and  the
     availability of internal relocation.

 43. I accept on the particular facts as  arise  in  this  matter  that  the
     appellant, who I have found to be a credible witness as to her personal
     history, is truthful as to her family's connections to the  police  and
     military and so there is a real likelihood that an  effort  by  her  to
     secure protection from the authorities will become known to her family.

 44. Dr. Zvan-Elliott observes at [34] that Moroccan criminal law  does  not
     permit the police to intervene in domestic disputes unless there is  an
     'imminent' threat of death, 'a policy aptly described by  the  infamous
     catchphrase 'is there blood?' She further details that prosecutors  are
     incapable of investigating cases of assault unless a woman  provides  a
     medical certificate that proves she has  been  incapacitated  for  more
     than 20 days due to her injuries.

 45. At [17], Dr. Zvan-Elliott identifies the relatively high prevalence  of
     gender-based violence  in  Morocco  and  the  limited  written  reports
     completed by the police when a complaint is made (25%),  arrest  (1.3%)
     or indictment (1.8%). As to the availability  and  sufficiency  of  the
     protection offered by the Moroccan authorities, she opines, at [25] and
     [27]:

         'The secretary of state concludes in paragraph 81 that '(...) it is
         believed that the authorities in Morocco are able to  provide  [the
         appellant] with effective protection to the  standard  set  out  in
         Horvath and thus she is not in need  of  international  protection.
         This is a surprising conclusion based on the evidence the secretary
         of state provides in paragraph 78, which clearly  demonstrates  the
         weakness  and  oftentimes  non-existence  of   legal   and   police
         protection. In addition, my own  peer-reviewed  published  research
         and extensive ethnographic fieldwork allows  me  to  conclude  that
         women's rights in Morocco may be improving on paper or surface, but
         that the limited legal and  economic  reforms  have  little  to  no
         impact  in  the  lived  situation  of  women.  This  conclusion  is
         supported by the Global Gender Gap report  of  2017  where  Morocco
         ranks as 136 out of 144 countries.'

         'Osire Glacier, a Moroccan sociologist, recently published  a  book
         on femininity, masculinity, and sexuality in Morocco in  which  she
         persuasively argues  how  violence  against  women  in  Morocco  is
         normalised:  'Families  employ  systemic  violence  towards   their
         daughters' with the aim 'to break their bodies, silence wills,  and
         stifle desires.' She furthermore asserts that 'the masculine  state
         relegates some of its monopoly over violence  to  family  members.'
         This is done through different stipulation in various legal  codes,
         such as the aforementioned Family Code, Commercial Code,  and  more
         importantly Penal Code.'

 46. As to the  substance  of  any  potential  protection  Dr.  Zvan-Elliott
     details at [40] that there are multiple NGO reports which show  a  deep
     distrust by vulnerable persons in the justice and police  systems.  She
     observes, at [35], that Law no. 103-13 on violence against women  fails
     to provide any civil protection  or  temporary  restraining  orders  or
     other civil remedies or establish  any  specific  services  or  provide
     concrete support for women survivors of violence. She further opines at
     [38] - [39]:

         'The secretary of state states  in  paragraph  77  that  'there  is
         evidence available that the authorities  are  able  to  offer  [the
         appellant] protection in the circumstances  [she  has]  described.'
         Based on the previous section of the legal situation, I would argue
         vehemently against the secretary of state's conclusion at paragraph
         78, that authorities  in  Morocco  'are  willing  to  provide  [the
         appellant] with protection.' In addition to  what  I  have  already
         stated, Human Rights Watch reports  that  103-13  law  on  violence
         against  women  'set  out  duties  of   police,   prosecutors   and
         investigative judges in domestic violence cases,  or  fund  women's
         shelters.' However, they 'know of fewer than  10  shelters  in  the
         country that accept domestic violence  survivors,  and  these  have
         limited capacity' ... all of these shelters are severely limited in
         terms of how many women they can admit, they  are  underfunded  and
         understaffed as they belong  to  women's  rights  associations  and
         hence cannot offer long-term accommodation and/or help.'

         'Women understand and are very aware of how little protection  they
         can get from the state. It is for this reason that many  endure  in
         violent family environments. One client of  the  Listening  Centre,
         after showing us her bruised body and me asking  her  if  she  will
         divorce her  husband,  replied  to  me  somewhat  surprised  by  my
         questions: 'of course  no,'  and  ended  the  conversation  with  a
         Moroccan proverb: 'a covered head is better than a naked  one.'  In
         other  words,  the  status  of  being  a  member  of  your  family,
         regardless of  the  constant  humiliation,  violence  and  profound
         vulnerability, continues  to  be  the  only  alternative  of  being
         stripped of not only your home but, more importantly, your dignity.
         Women who are on their own in Morocco continues to be  stigmatized,
         as society blames them for dishonouring their families arguing that
         they failed to show respect towards their fathers and/or  husbands,
         were not obedient and were not patient.'

 47. In the particular circumstances arising in this appeal, I find that the
     appellant would not secure adequate protection from the serious  threat
     of harm posed  by  family  members  because  the  Moroccan  authorities
     possess inadequate capability to protect her by means  of  the  present
     legal regime, both criminal and civil, and further there is a  lack  of
     willingness on the part of the  Moroccan  authorities  to  protect  her
     until there is an imminent risk of serious harm and when that  time  is
     reached  there  are  inadequate  resources  to  provide  the   required
     protection. I therefore find in relation to  this  appellant  that  she
     does not enjoy a sufficiency of protection in Morocco  with  regard  to
     the serious threats to kill made by members of her family.

 48. Having accepted  the  appellant  to  be  credible  as  to  the  present
     hostility of male members of her close family to her, I accept that she
     cannot return to her family home. I further accept  Dr.  Zvan-Elliott's
     opinion, at [32] that by extension Morocco's Commercial  Code,  article
     3, is applied by banks and employers as the basis for demands  that  an
     unmarried  woman  provide  her  father's  consent  when  opening   bank
     accounts, seeking employment etc.

 49. She further details at [42] that as a single woman seeking  to  rent  a
     property on her own, landlords will strongly suspect that the appellant
     is a prostitute, which will give rise to harassment  from  the  police.
     She will not be able to secure  the  signature  from  her  father  that
     landlords would expect.

 50. At [43] Dr. Zvan-Elliott notes that whilst new residents to an area are
     not required  to  officially  register,  the  system  is  'set-up'  for
     officials to know of any newcomers as Morocco is  a  police  state  and
     operates  a  system  of  local  Interior  Ministry  officials,   called
     muqaddam, that reside in and act as the eyes of individual communities:
     '[the appellant] moving to a different locality in  Morocco  without  a
     male or her family accompanying her, would raise a red flag.  In  order
     for the muqaddam to get to know the  background  of  the  newcomer,  he
     either has to know the person (visit your house, talk to  your  family,
     neighbours, employer, landlord, etc.) and/or does his research  on  the
     person's family situation. That would include notifying the muqaddam of
     the community where [the appellant's] own family lives and through  him
     the extended families of [the appellant] herself. This  could  lead  to
     not only her family finding out  where  she  lives  but  also  accruing
     additional anger of  the  family  for  continuing  to  undermine  their
     honour.'

 51. I observe Dr. Zvan-Elliott's conclusion, at [46] - [47]:

         'Without family protection and without  skills,  [the  appellant's]
         prospects for a secure and dignified future  look  extremely  grim.
         Even with limited legal protections, law  enforcement  institutions
         in Morocco continue to be extremely  patriarchal  and  masculine  -
         they are reluctant or even refuse to help women who come to  report
         family or other types of violence. As women continue to  be  blamed
         for abuse and violence done to them by family members and  intimate
         partners  and  without   legal   and   police   protections,   [the
         appellant's] fears of being  harassed  or  assaulted  were  she  to
         return to Morocco are therefore quite plausible and justified.'

         '[The  appellant]  could  face  significant  harm  and/or  physical
         violence by the community and  police  for  being  a  single  woman
         without the protection of her family were she to return to Morocco.
         It is furthermore quite possible that she would be exploited by the
         informal economy sector, a sector  that  is  not  impacted  by  the
         Labour Law protections.'

 52. In all of the circumstances, I find  to  the  requisite  standard  that
     there exists no reasonable internal flight alternative available to the
     appellant. It follows that the asylum appeal must be  allowed  as  must
     the human rights appeal on article 3 grounds.



Notice of decision

 53. The Judge materially erred in law for the  reasons  identified.  I  set
     aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  22  July  2019  pursuant  to
     section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

 54. The decision in the appeal is remade. The appeal is allowed  on  asylum
     and human rights (article 3) grounds.

 55. There is an order for anonymity.

 56. No fee was paid and so I make no fee award.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 18 September 2019
