
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11284/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 2 May 2018                     |on 10 May 2018                         |
|                                  |                                       |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                ABDOLREZA [R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms H Cosgrove, Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Clapham  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 December 2017.  Permission was granted  to  appeal  to
    the UT on 3 grounds.

 2. The respondent conceded that grounds 1 and 2 together disclose error of
    law, along these lines.  The respondent accepted that the appellant was
    no longer a Muslim, and was agnostic or  atheist  in  his  views.   The
    judge  did  not  deal  adequately  with  the  expert  report  and   the
    appellant's submissions, set out in  his  skeleton  argument,  that  he
    would be liable to be questioned on return about his asylum  claim;  he
    could not be expected to lie; and honest disclosure would place him  at
    risk.  Parties further agreed that the judge did not make the  findings
    of fact necessary to resolve these matters. That  included  the  issues
    whether the appellant  left  Iran  illegally,  which  might  impact  on
    documentation he could obtain for his return; whether it might be  open
    to him to return on documentation which would not draw attention to him
    as a failed asylum seeker; whether  he  was  reasonably  likely  to  be
    questioned; what was reasonably likely to emerge if he was  questioned;
    and the likely response of the authorities.

 3. Parties agreed that the foregoing required the decision to be set aside
    and a further hearing to take place.

 4. If confined to those matters, it would be apt for the  UT  to  complete
    the decision.

 5. The appellant also advanced ground 2, which  contends  that  the  judge
    misrecorded the appellants' evidence about documentation linking him to
    the charity, and so was under a  misconception  which  she  took  as  a
    significant point against him.  Ms Cosgrove supported the grounds  with
    a copy of the record she kept in the FtT.  Mrs O'Brien  said  that  the
    record kept by her colleague in the FtT supported the  record  for  the
    appellant.  She submitted, however, that the  difference,  which  comes
    down to an "if", was not significant enough to show an error.

 6. It was common ground that if the appellant  succeeded  on  this  ground
    also, the outcome should be a remit to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. I consider that ground 2 does disclose error,  although  not  precisely
    for the reason contended.  The judge found the matter to be a "complete
    contradiction" leading her to find the "whole account relative  to  the
    charity ... a complete and utter fabrication".  That goes a  very  long
    way on a tenuous basis.

 9. Records kept  by  different  parties,  unless  they  are  a  full  oral
    transcription, will never be word for word the same;  but  the  finding
    challenged in ground 2 is so strong that it  cannot  sit  even  with  a
    relatively minor misrecording of the evidence.

10. I note also that although the hearing was on 26 July 2017, the decision
    was promulgated only on 6 December 2017, and  contains  no  explanation
    for the delay.  This was not part of the grounds, and parties  did  not
    make any submissions on whether  delay  was  significant;  but  it  may
    partly explain lack of precision in the outcome.

11. There is a presumption that the UT will proceed to remake decisions, of
    which parties are reminded in  directions  issued  with  the  grant  of
    permission.  However, the nature of this case, as explained  above,  is
    such that it is appropriate under  section  12  of  the  2002  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit  to  the  FtT  for  an  entirely  fresh
    hearing.

12. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

13. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Clapham.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            3 May 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




