


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/11753/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16th August 2017                        |On 21st August 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                                     DN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson,  Counsel instructed by Greater
                       Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Palestinian born in 1981.    He  has  permission  to
    appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Alty)  to
    dismiss his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him
    protection.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background


 3. The Appellant's case was that he was formerly occupied as an  ambulance
    driver in Gaza. He observed that during  the  Israeli  bombardments  of
    Gaza in both 2012 and 2014  Hamas  had  used  ambulances  in  order  to
    transport its activists.  He  made  his  opposition  to  this  practice
    public, and received threats from Hamas militants as a result.   He now
    feared for his safety.


 4. In her letter of the 13th October  2016  the  Respondent  rejected  the
    claim that the Appellant was an ambulance driver. This was  principally
    because  of  inconsistencies  arising  from  the   Appellant's   stated
    occupation on  a  previous  visa  application  and  his  landing  card.
    Documentary evidence produced to substantiate  his  claimed  occupation
    were rejected without particular reason, other than a  rounded  Tanveer
    Ahmed assessment.   The Respondent went on to consider the  Appellant's
    evidence  that  he  had  been  threatened  by  Hamas.   A   number   of
    inconsistencies  were  identified  before  the  letter  concluded,   at
    paragraph 29: "due  to  the  inconsistencies  and  credibility  factors
    highlighted in the above evidence, and because your claim to have  been
    an ambulance driver has been rejected, it is  rejected  that  you  were
    threatened by Hamas". Protection was refused.

 5. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal it  was  argued  on
    the Appellant's behalf that the weight  of  the  evidence  demonstrated
    that he had been working as an ambulance driver. It was further  argued
    that since rejection of this matter had formed the cornerstone  of  the
    Respondent's  position  on  the  Appellant's  credibility,  a  positive
    finding on this matter should inevitably lead  to  a  positive  finding
    overall. The grounds of appeal, drafted by Mr Nicholson who was Counsel
    before the First-tier  Tribunal,  aver  that  this  analysis  had  been
    accepted at the outset of the hearing by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.   It is submitted that the lengthy cross  examination  of  the
    Appellant focused almost  exclusively  on  the  matter  of  the  clamed
    employment, as had the Respondent's submissions.

 6. When the determination was promulgated, it became clear that the First-
    tier Tribunal had accepted that the Appellant had discharged the burden
    of  proof  in  respect  of  his  claim  to  be  an  ambulance   driver.
    Notwithstanding the sustained assault on his evidence  mounted  by  the
    Respondent, that element of the claim was proven. The Tribunal was  not
    however satisfied that the Appellant had spoken out or been targeted by
    Hamas as a result, and the appeal was accordingly dismissed.



    The Challenge: Discussion and Findings

 7. Mr Nicholson's grounds are lengthy and detailed. Before  me  they  were
    distilled into two  points.  I  consider  each,  and  the  Respondent's
    position, in turn.


    Fairness

 8. The first is that there was a procedural  unfairness  in  the  approach
    taken to the question of credibility.   Mr Nicholson  submits  that  it
    was agreed at the outset of the hearing  that  the  central  issue  was
    whether or not the  Appellant  worked  as  an  ambulance  driver.   The
    Respondent's case, put to the First-tier Tribunal, had been  that  this
    man was lying about his claimed occupation, and since  that  matter  of
    fact underpinned the  entire  account,  the  entire  account  could  be
    dismissed. That being the agreed framework for enquiry,  the matter  of
    the Appellant's work had been the only issue canvassed in  examination-
    in-chief, in  cross-examination  and  indeed  in  submissions  by  both
    parties. It was Mr Nicholson's case that very little, if anything,  was
    said about the claimed threats from Hamas.  He  therefore  objects,  in
    strong terms, to the fact  that  the  appeal  was  dismissed  on  these
    credibility grounds notwithstanding the fact that the central issue had
    been resolved in the Appellant's favour.

 9. There  are  two  limbs  to  this  point.   The  first  arises  from  Mr
    Nicholson's  assertion that he has in effect been taken by surprise  by
    the Tribunal in respect of the Hamas  threats.   I  was  not  initially
    impressed by this ground. In his written grounds and  oral  submissions
    Mr Nicholson asserts that in effect the only matter in issue  had  been
    the claimed employment: the threats were discounted because the claimed
    employment had been disbelieved. The difficulty with this  analysis  is
    that it is not an accurate reflection of the refusal letter.  As I note
    above that letter had placed both matters discretely in issue. It  does
    not say, as contended by the grounds, that "your  claim  to  have  been
    threatened is rejected because it is not  accepted  that  you  were  an
    ambulance  driver".  What  the   letter   does   is   set   out   three
    inconsistencies alleged to arise in  the  evidence  before  concluding:
    "due to the inconsistencies and credibility factors highlighted in  the
    above evidence, and because your claim to have been an ambulance driver
    has been rejected, it is rejected that you were threatened  by  Hamas".
    The refusal letter does not therefore support Counsel's case  analysis.




10. Having heard from both parties, and having had regard to the record  of
    proceedings, I am nevertheless persuaded - just - that  the  ground  is
    made out. That is because I accept that notwithstanding what  might  be
    said in the letter, it would appear that at the hearing, the matters in
    issue  were  narrowed  as  Mr  Nicholson  describes.   The  record   of
    proceedings  clearly  records  the  opening  discussion   as   follows:
    "credibility of claim to be an ambulance  driver  main  issue".  I  was
    unable to find any reference to the alleged Hamas threats.  Mr  Diwnycz
    was unable to identify any questions asked or submissions made  on  the
    topic. Whilst it is arguable that both counsel and the  HOPO  erred  in
    their reading of the refusal letter, I accept that there was  consensus
    at the hearing to the extent that the matters in  issue  had  narrowed.
    The consequence of that was that Mr Nicholson did not address the Hamas
    issue in either his examination-in-chief or in his submissions. Had  he
    done so, the result might have been different.

11. The second limb of this  ground  is  that  in  its  evaluation  of  the
    Appellant's credibility the Tribunal  has  failed  to  weigh  into  the
    balance the fact that it had already found him to be credible about the
    central (if not only) matter  in  issue.  The  bulk  of  the  interview
    questions, reasons for refusal and cross-examination at hearing had all
    been concerned with whether  or  not  he  had  driven  ambulances.  The
    Tribunal found that he had, but nowhere appeared  to  give  credit  for
    that positive finding in its assessment  of  his  claim  to  have  been
    threatened. Mr Diwnycz accepted that this  was  so,  and  that  in  the
    circumstances (outlined above) it was a  material  matter  that  should
    have weighed in the Appellant's favour.


    Anxious Scrutiny


12. The grounds on this matter are extensive, detailing several submissions
    and pieces of evidence that the First-tier Tribunal is alleged to  have
    failed to take into account. The crux of the point is that the Tribunal
    misunderstood  or  diminished  certain   aspects   of   the   evidence,
    principally relating to the ability of Palestinians  to  travel,  these
    being significant for the assessment of both credibility and risk  [see
    for instance at 34].   Mr Diwnycz, whilst making no concessions  as  to
    the weight that might ultimately be attached to those matters, accepted
    that the determination did not reflect any recording  or  consideration
    of them. In the context of the Appellant's first ground of  appeal,  it
    would appear to be a legitimate complaint that the case put by  Counsel
    was not addressed.



      Decisions


13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains  material  errors
    in approach as set out above.


14. The parties agreed that  in  the  circumstances  the  most  appropriate
    outcome was that the decision be set aside and the matter remitted  for
    hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

15. There is an order for anonymity.


      [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     15th
                                 August 2017












