
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/11293/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the                  |Decision & Reasons           |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008|Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 02 July 2020              |
|On 22 June 2020                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     RM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, further to directions issued  by  the
President of the Upper Tribunal sent out on 8 April 2020 and 19 May 2020.

The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 1 May 1989. He arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 1 January 2010 on a student visa valid until 20  April
2012. On 24 September 2012 he made an application for  leave  to  remain  on
the basis of his private and family life, but his  application  was  refused
on 6 January 2014 without a right of appeal. The  appellant  claimed  asylum
on 24 October 2016 after being arrested and detained on 21 August  2016  and
served with removal papers as an overstayer. His  claim  was  refused  on  4
November 2019.

The appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Bangladesh because  of  his
involvement with the political party Jamaat-e-Islami  (JI).  He  claimed  to
have joined the party when studying at college in 2006 and  to  have  become
the general secretary of the  student  wing  of  the  party  for  his  area,
organising large rallies and meetings. He claimed to have  been  accused  of
involvement in the murder of a JI party leader  who  was  believed  to  have
been murdered by someone within the party in  September  2007  and  that  an
arrest warrant had been issued for his arrest. He claimed  that  the  police
visited his home several times between 2007 and 2009 but he was not at  home
on any of those occasions. He left Bangladesh at the end  of  December  2019
after obtaining a student visa. He feared persecution by  the  Awami  League
and the police.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was a member of the JI, owing to his limited  knowledge  of  the  party  and
inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  in   his   evidence.   The   respondent
considered that he would not be at risk on return  to  Bangladesh  and  that
his removal to that country would not breach his human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard by  First
tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro on 20  December  2019.  Judge  O'Garro  accepted
that the appellant was a JI party member in Bangladesh but  did  not  accept
that he was an activist and did not accept that he held  the  role  claimed.
She found that he had no political profile when he  was  in  Bangladesh  and
that he would be returning there with no political profile.  The  judge  did
not accept the appellant's claim to be the subject of an arrest warrant  and
did not accept his reasons for leaving Bangladesh. She  considered  that  he
was not a credible witness and she did not accept his  explanation  for  the
delay in making his asylum claim. She considered that he was of no  interest
to the Awami League or to the authorities in Bangladesh and would be  at  no
risk on return. She dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds,  in  a  decision
promulgated on 7 January 2020.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  the  grounds  that  the
judge's finding, that the appellant was  at  no  risk  as  a  low  level  JI
member, was inconsistent with  the  country  reports  which  the  judge  had
failed to consider; that the judge's findings  on  the  lack  of  an  arrest
warrant were inconsistent with the country information; that the  judge  had
erred by failing to consider the appellant's explanation for  the  delay  in
making his asylum claim; and that the judge made an incorrect assessment  of
the appellant's private life claim under Article 8.

Permission was granted on 6 February 2020.

The matter was listed for a hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 14 April  2020,
but was subsequently postponed due to the circumstances  relating  to  Covid
19. The case was then  reviewed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  a  Note  and
Directions initially sent out on 8 April 2020, but then re-sent  on  19  May
2020 owing to the appellant's change of solicitors,  the  President  of  the
Upper Tribunal indicated that he had reached the provisional view  that  the
question of whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved  the  making
of error of law and, if so, whether the decision should be set aside,  could
be made without a hearing. Submissions were invited from the parties.

Written submissions have been received from  both  parties.  In  a  rule  24
response dated 23 April 2020 the respondent  responded  to  the  grounds  of
appeal and made no objection to the matter being decided on the papers.  The
appellant's representatives made written submissions on 2 June  2020,  which
included an objection to the matter being dealt with  on  the  papers  under
rule 34.

I have had  careful  regard  to  the  objections  made  by  the  appellant's
solicitors to the matter being decided without  an  oral  hearing  and  have
considered Rule 5A as inserted into the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 as relied  upon  by  the  appellant  at  [19]  and  [20]  of  his
submissions. Rule 5A(3) makes it  clear  that  a  decision  to  determine  a
matter without a hearing is not restricted to the conditions in  5A(2).  The
objections  at  [22]  to  [24]  are  general  in  nature  and   provide   no
satisfactory reason as to why, in this particular case, the appellant  would
be prejudiced by the absence of an oral  hearing.  I  have  the  benefit  of
submissions from both parties as well as the detailed grounds of appeal  and
I can find no reason why a consideration of those  submissions,  as  opposed
to hearing from counsel in person, would prejudice  the  appellant  in  this
particular case. I do not accept that deciding the matter without a  hearing
would give rise to any unfairness and I consider that I am able,  fully  and
fairly, to consider the error of law  issue  on  the  basis  of  the  papers
before me in accordance with rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.

I have therefore proceeded  to  consider  whether  or  not  Judge  O'Garro's
decision contains errors of  law  such  that  it  should  be  set  aside.  I
conclude that there are no errors of law in her decision. I do  so  for  the
following reasons.

Contrary to the assertions made  in  the  grounds,  Judge  O'Garro  provided
various cogent reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim to  have  been  a
party activist for the JI. Paragraph 10 of the appellant's original  grounds
asserts that the judge failed to give him  credit  for  the  explanation  he
provided  in  his  statement  about  his  responses  to  questions  at   his
interview, but that it is clearly not the case because she was  prepared  to
accept that he had been involved with the student wing of  the  JI,  despite
the respondent's rejection of his claim in that respect.

The judge, however, did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  any  active
involvement, or any particular role, within the JI, other than being  a  low
level member/ supporter. She considered, at [31], that the  absence  of  any
harm or threat of harm to the appellant despite  the  evidence  of  violence
faced  by  political  activists,  suggested  that  he  did  not   have   any
significant profile. She  noted,  at  [32],  that  the  background  evidence
suggested that it was  mainly  leaders  and  political  activists  who  were
exposed to violence and that the appellant had provided no evidence to  show
that he had such a profile. The appellant's grounds seek  to  challenge  the
judge's findings in that respect,  asserting  that  her  findings  showed  a
disregard of the reports in the background country information  of  problems
faced by all JI members. However it seems to  me  that  the  reports  relied
upon by the appellant in fact support the judge's findings, as they  clearly
refer to the incidents of violence, false and fabricated  cases,  harassment
and intimidation and arrests being particularly directed against  those  who
were leaders and political activists. There  is  nothing  in  the  extensive
extracts from the country information within the grounds  which  supports  a
claim that all those involved with the JI at any level are, as a  matter  of
course, at risk of persecution, which is what the appellant  is  effectively
arguing. It  is  plain  that  the  judge  had  regard  to  all  the  country
background evidence, in any event, and  the  fact  that  she  did  not  make
specific references to the reports does not,  in  my  view,  show  that  she
failed to engage with the country information.

In addition to the absence of threats of harm and  actual  harm  experienced
by the appellant, the judge went on to give further reasons for  considering
that he had not provided a credible account of having come  to  the  adverse
interest of the Awami League and the authorities. The judge, at [34],  noted
the absence of evidence to support the appellant's  claim  to  have  had  an
arrest warrant issued against him. The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal,  at
[9], assert that the judge was being selective  in  her  reliance  upon  the
background evidence in relation to the issuing of  arrest  warrants  to  the
accused, and state that the evidence also showed that  arrest  warrants  and
court documents were not always delivered to the accused  or  their  family.
At [11] the grounds  asserted  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  expect  the
appellant's family to attempt to obtain documents from the police.  However,
it seems to me that the judge was perfectly entitled  to  conclude  that  if
there had been an arrest warrant issued against the appellant together  with
court documents, at a time when he was in Bangladesh, it was  reasonable  to
expect evidence of such to be obtained.  There  was  background  information
before her suggesting that he would have access to such  documents  and  the
judge was perfectly entitled  to  rely  upon  that  evidence  and  draw  the
adverse conclusions that she did from the  appellant's  failure  to  produce
relevant documentary evidence, particularly when  taken  together  with  the
other cogent reasons  given  for  finding  his  account  to  be  lacking  in
credibility.

A  further  reason  given  by  the  judge  for  having  concerns  about  the
appellant's credibility was the timing of his asylum claim, which  was  made
over six years after his entry to the UK and only after he was  arrested  as
an overstayer. At [13] of the grounds it is asserted that  the  judge  erred
by failing to accept the appellant's explanation for  the  delay  in  making
his claim.  However,  the  judge  plainly  had  regard  to  the  appellant's
explanation, at [39], and provided proper reasons for rejecting it  and  for
drawing the adverse conclusions that she did from the timing of the claim.

For all these reasons it seems to me that the judge was  perfectly  entitled
to conclude that the appellant was at no risk on return to  Bangladesh.  She
had the benefit  of  hearing  live  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  she
provided clear and cogent reasons for concluding that he had not provided  a
genuine and credible account of his political profile and  his  reasons  for
leaving Bangladesh. Furthermore, the judge plainly gave  full  consideration
to the background country information before her when assessing the risk  on
return and was properly entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant  did  not
have a profile which would give rise to any adverse interest in him  by  the
authorities in Bangladesh. Indeed, there is nothing in the  evidence  before
the judge to show, even to the lower standard of proof, that a  person  with
the appellant's history of low level  political  involvement  in  Bangladesh
and with no current active involvement since coming  to  the  UK  ten  years
ago, would be at any risk on return to that country.  The  judge's  findings
and conclusions were cogently reasoned and were fully and properly  open  to
her on the evidence before her. The grounds do not disclose  any  errors  of
law in her decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 22 June 2020
