
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/11131/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28th September 2017                    | On 16th October 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               mr madadi zaker
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He claims to have been born
    on 13th March 1999 but this is doubted by the Secretary of State and he
    is believed to have been born on 1st March 1996.  The Appellant applied
    for asylum based on a purported  fear  of  persecution  in  Afghanistan
    because of his imputed political opinion  namely  that  he  feared  the
    Taliban.  The Appellant's application was refused by Notice of  Refusal
    dated 30th September 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Bradshaw sitting at Bradford on  18th  May  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  26th  May  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  7th
    June 2017.  On 19th June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Astle  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Astle noted that the grounds  argued  that
    the judge had erred in failing to make any finding on  the  Appellant's
    claimed ethnicity and in failing to assess the risk under  the  Refugee
    Convention as a result of  his  ethnicity/membership  of  a  particular
    social group.  Further it was argued with reference to the  Appellant's
    PTSD that the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account  the  recent
    authority of Paposhvili v Belgium (41738/10).  Judge  Astle  considered
    that it was arguable that the judge had erred in  failing  to  consider
    the Appellant's ethnicity  and  risk  on  return  in  that  regard  and
    permission was therefore granted.  So far as the medical aspect of  the
    claim was concerned it was clear that there was a lack of  satisfactory
    evidence but he also considered that that point could be argued in view
    of the recent authority.

 4. On 6th July 2017 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Respondent did not  oppose  the  Appellant's
    application for permission  to  appeal  and  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral  (continuance)  hearing  to
    consider the Appellant's claim based on ethnicity and risk on return.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before  me.   The  Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel Ms Wilkins.  The Appellant  does  not
    personally attend.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Harrison notes that there has been a concession already made by  the
    Secretary of State in the Rule 24 response to the effect that there  is
    a material error of law within the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge based on the failure therein to give due and proper consideration
    to the Appellant's claim based on ethnicity and  risk  on  return.   He
    consequently, on the Secretary of State's behalf, invites me  to  remit
    the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 7. Ms Wilkins reiterates this position pointing that it was arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  make  any
    findings on his claimed ethnicity and that there was evidence  of  this
    in the form of a letter from the Hazara Association and the  fact  that
    the Appellant was speaking Dari a language only spoken in  Afghanistan.
    Further she submits that the First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  assess
    the risk under the Refugee Convention as a result  of  the  Appellant's
    ethnicity by misapplying the decision in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan
    [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC).  She emphasises  that  whilst  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge accepted that the Appellant has PTSD she had  failed  to
    make any onward assessment of the risk of Article 3 ill-treatment as  a
    result of his mental health and the impact upon return to Afghanistan.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

10. Whilst there is a concession by the Secretary of State in both the Rule
    24 and the submissions of Mr Harrison that there are errors of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge it is necessary  for  the
    Tribunal to give due and proper consideration to these matters.  Having
    done that I am satisfied that there is merit in  the  submission  made.
    It does appear that the decision is flawed with material errors of  law
    in that there appears to have been a failure by the judge to  make  any
    finding on the Appellant's claimed ethnicity and has failed  to  assess
    his risk under the Refugee Convention.  Further the judge has failed to
    give due  consideration  to  Paposhvili  v  Belgium  a  decision  which
    clarifies the law and provides guidance on the circumstances  in  which
    an alien suffering from a serious  illness  can  resist  removal  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR and gives rise to serious questions as to whether
    the present UK jurisprudence is in  step  with  the  standards  set  in
    Strasbourg.

11. For all the above reasons I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is materially flawed and I set aside that  decision  and
    give directions for the rehearing of this matter.

Decision and Directions

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside.  The following directions are to apply:

      1) On there being a finding that there is a material error of law  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside with none of
         the findings of fact to stand.

      2) The matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
         Bradford or Manchester on the first available date  42  days  hence
         with an ELH of 3 hours.

      3) That the remitted hearing is to be before any  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge other than Immigration Judge Bradshaw.

      4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a  bundle  of
         additional subjective and/or objective  evidence  upon  which  they
         seek to rely within 28 days of today's date.

      5) That the Appellant do attend the restored hearing.

      6) That a Dari interpreter do attend the remitted hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
