
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/11284/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 April 2018                             |On 16 April 2018                |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                      AC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Mackenzie, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court.

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 17 October 2017 refusing his application for asylum.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on [ ] 1977.  He arrived  in
    the UK on 22 June 2017 and applied for asylum the same day.  He claimed
    that he would be at risk of persecution on the basis of  his  political
    opinion as a member of the HDP, which he joined in 2015.  He  described
    incidents when he had  been  detained  and  ill-treated  in  March  and
    September  2014.   After  his  second  detention  the  military  police
    threatened that he and his family would be killed if he continued to be
    active politically.  He remained living in his village between 2014 and
    2017 when he did not encounter any other problems with the  authorities
    and ceased his political activities.  He left for Istanbul in  mid-2017
    following an incident on 5 May 2017 when, after he had bought items for
    members of the PKK, the authorities came  to  his  family  home  asking
    about him and concluded that he had escaped to the  mountains  and  had
    joined the PKK.

3.    The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was or had been  a
    member of the HDP or that he had been detained  and  ill-treated.   She
    found that he would be of no adverse interest  to  the  authorities  on
    return to Turkey and his application was refused.

4.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant and from a witness called  on  his  behalf.
    Having reviewed the evidence he said that he was not satisfied that the
    appellant had given a truthful and accurate account or that he would be
    at any real risk of harm if returned to Turkey.

5.    In the grounds of appeal,  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  by
    failing to make a specific finding  on  whether  the  appellant  was  a
    member of the HDP, particularly in the light of his assertion  that  he
    had produced at  his  asylum  interview  documentary  evidence  of  his
    membership which was then returned  to  him  by  the  respondent.   The
    grounds also argue that the judge had been wrong  not  to  accept  that
    that the appellant was suspected of going to the mountains to join  the
    PKK simply because he had not been involved in any  political  activity
    for three years and that  he  failed  to  consider  properly  the  risk
    factors identified in IK (returnees-records-IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT
    00312.

6.    At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis indicated that  he  had  discovered
    on the respondent's file a copy of the document the appellant  said  he
    had produced at his asylum interview relating to his membership of  the
    HDP.  He conceded that the fact that there was such a copy,  which  had
    not been produced at the hearing, was at least capable of affecting the
    judge's findings on credibility,  particularly  in  the  light  of  the
    submission made on the respondent's behalf at [16] that  the  appellant
    had  not  been  able  to  provide  any  documentation  confirming   his
    membership of the HDP.

7.    The judge  dealt  specifically  with  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    membership of the  HDP  in  [23]  saying  that  he  did  not  find  his
    explanation of his membership to be credible because he failed  to  see
    why he would have become a member in  2015  at  a  time  when,  on  his
    account, he had decided  to  cease  being  involved  in  any  political
    activities.  At [29] when drawing together the various points  made  in
    the case, the judge noted that the  appellant  had  provided  objective
    evidence in support of his case, but he regarded that as outweighed  by
    the other factors he had identified.  Had the document relating to  the
    appellant's membership of the HDP been produced, that would  have  been
    another factor for the judge to take into account which, whilst  by  no
    means  determinative,  was  capable  of  affecting  the   decision   on
    credibility.

8.    I am, therefore, satisfied that the respondent's  failure  to  produce
    the copy document held on file, which I accept was inadvertent,  was  a
    procedural irregularity capable of causing unfairness and  as  such  an
    error of law.

9.    I agree with both representatives that  the  proper  course  in  these
    circumstances is for the appeal to be remitted for  reconsideration  by
    the First-tier Tribunal by way of a full rehearing.

Decision

10.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  The decision is set aside.  The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  reconsideration  by
    way of a full rehearing by a different judge.

11.   In the light of  the  issues  raised  in  this  asylum  appeal,  I  am
    satisfied that this is a proper case for an order to be made under rule
    14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I  make
    an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely
    to lead to the appellant being identified.




Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 10 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
