
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11448/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2019             |On 25 February 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                  LUIS [O]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G  L Capel, Counsel
                    (instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Bird on 7 January 2019 against the determination  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge E M M Smith who had dismissed the  appeal
         of  the  Appellant  against  the  refusal  of   his   international
         protection claim.  The decision and reasons was  promulgated  on  7
         December 2018.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of El Salvador, born on 9 June 1979.
         He claimed in summary that he was at risk on return  from  criminal
         gangs.   After  reviewing  the  evidence  the  Appellant  presented
         against  his  immigration  history,  Judge  Smith  found  that  the
         Appellant was not credible and that his claim was  fabricated.   He
         was able to return to El Salvador safely.

    3.     Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
         arguable that the  judge  had  placed  too  much  emphasis  on  the
         Appellant's past deceitful conduct in the United  Kingdom  and  had
         failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
         claim.

    4.     No notice under rule 24 had been served by the  Respondent,  but
         Ms Cunha indicated that the onwards appeal was opposed.




    Submissions

    5.     Ms Capel for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal and the grant of permission  to  appeal  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  In summary, counsel mounted an extensive assault on  the
         First-tier Tribunal determination, contending that  the  judge  had
         failed to have proper regard to the country background evidence and
         had failed  to  take  a  structured  approach  to  the  credibility
         assessment, ignoring the guidance set out in KB and  NH  (Pakistan)
         [2017] UKUT 491 (IAC).   The  judge  had  treated  the  Appellant's
         immigration history as both the beginning and the end of his  case.
         This had also ignored the guidance in SM (Section 8)  [2005]  UKAIT
         116. The fact that the Appellant had engaged in fraudulent  conduct
         in the past did not mean that his story about reporting  the  theft
         of his identity papers was necessarily untrue. The judge had  given
         insufficient  attention  to  the  internal   consistency   of   the
         Appellant's account and to the Appellant's documents.  The decision
         and reasons was unsafe and should  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
         reheard before another judge.

    6.     It was not necessary to call on Ms Cunha.




    No material error of law finding

    7.     The tribunal reserved its  decision,  which  now  follows.   The
         tribunal must reject the submissions as to material  error  of  law
         made on behalf of the  Appellant.   In  the  tribunal's  view,  the
         errors asserted to exist in the decision and reasons are  illusory.
         The grant of permission to appeal was a very liberal  one,  because
         essentially the dispute is over findings of  fact  with  which  the
         Appellant disagrees.

    8.     The determination was carefully prepared by an experienced judge
         who  stated  specifically  that  all  of  the  evidence  had   been
         considered: see [19] and [21] of the determination.   That  was  no
         mere formula.  This was not an appeal where  the  judge  in  effect
         relied on section 8 or the Appellant's history and went no further.
           The  judge  specifically  directed  himself  as  to  the  correct
         assessment of credibility with reference to K (DRC) [2003] UKAIT 14
         and other relevant authorities.   The  guidance  in  that  decision
         parallels that in KB and NH (above).  All matters were  brought  to
         account, in the round, following a logical analysis, with a clearly
         structured approach.

    9.     The determination began in correct chronological order,  setting
         of the scene and establishing the context, the Appellant's past and
         also recent dishonest attempts to gain entry to the United  Kingdom
         and the associated dishonesty of his wife with  their  son.   These
         were calculated and deliberate actions.  No  judge  could  properly
         ignore  that  in  evaluating  the   Appellant's   reliability   and
         credibility, particularly when the Appellant in effect asserted his
         good character when seeking to justify his more recent actions.

    10.    The country background concerning El Salvador  and  its  various
         serious problems was not in dispute.  The judge explained why  that
         made the Appellant's story concerning  the  events  which  he  said
         caused him to leave  significantly  less  likely.   Similarly,  the
         judge explained by reference to TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA  Civ  4009
         why it was proper to draw adverse  inferences  from  the  selective
         production of documents by the Appellant.

    11.    The judge focussed on the central elements  of  the  Appellant's
         story which if reasonably likely to be true were capable of causing
         real risk and explained why  those  claims  were  implausible,  for
         example, that the Appellant would not have  bothered  to  take  the
         time, trouble and possible  risk  of  making  a  complaint  to  the
         police, given the ease with which the supposedly  stolen  documents
         were replaced.   The  judge  was  fully  entitled  to  examine  the
         substance of the Appellant's claimed motivation of the duty of good
         citizenship, and  to  find  the  claim  hollow.   The  plausibility
         assessment was  conducted  against  established  facts,  e.g.,  the
         Appellant's past conduct and the country  background,  not  against
         the  judge's  personal  view  of   likelihood.   The   plausibility
         assessment is an unimpeachable finding with substantial  and  sound
         reasons given.  The fact that the Appellant had kept to  his  story
         and that there were no discrepancies took the case no further.

    12.    Perhaps even more importantly, on a fair and full reading of the
         determination, it is clear that the judge  was  constantly  testing
         his conclusions,  giving  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  evidence  and
         considering the alternatives: this can be  seen  in  particular  at
         [28]  of  the  determination  which  sets  out  the  judge's  final
         reflections.

    13.    The judge's assessment of real risk on return, on the  basis  of
         his  adverse  credibility  findings,  was  open  to  him.   In  the
         tribunal's view, the submissions advanced on the Appellant's behalf
         amount to no more than disagreement with the  judge's  findings  of
         fact, all of which were available to him on the evidence presented,
         which  evidence  was  plainly  sufficiently  considered   and   the
         consequent findings adequately reasoned.  The tribunal  finds  that
         there was no material error of law in the decision challenged.




    DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.




    Signed Dated 21 February 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


