

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/11944/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 September 2019                    |On 24 September 2019                  |
|                                        |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     NH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

       1. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan.   She  has  two  children
          born in 2007 (in Pakistan)  and  2012  (in  the  United  Kingdom).
          They are both Pakistani citizens  but  "qualifying  children"  for
          the purposes of s. 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
          Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').


       2. I have made an anonymity direction because  this  decision  refers
          to the circumstances of the appellant's children.


       3. The appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
          Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Forster sent on 4 July 2019, in  which  her
          human rights and asylum appeals were dismissed.   The findings  in
          relation to the asylum claim  have  not  been  challenged  in  the
          grounds of appeal against the FTT's decision, and I  need  say  no
          more about them.

Background

       4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a student in  2010.
           Her husband and elder child joined her in 2011.   When  her  visa
          expired in 2015, the appellant remained  as  an  overstayer.   Her
          claim  for  asylum  in  2016  was  unsuccessful   and   ultimately
          dismissed by FTT Judge Cox in a decision dated  9  February  2018.
          Fresh submissions resulted in a further  refusal  and  the  appeal
          before Judge Forster.


       5.  The  appellant  now  seeks  to  appeal  against  this   decision,
          permission having been granted by FTT Judge  Loke  in  a  decision
          dated 2 August 2019.

Grounds of appeal

       6. At the beginning of the hearing, Mr Ahmed accepted  that  although
          the grounds of appeal are threefold,  he  no  longer  relied  upon
          grounds 1 and 3.  Mr Ahmed was  correct  to  take  this  approach.
          Contrary to vague written  submissions  in  ground  1,  the  Judge
          Forster clearly took  into  account  the  best  interests  of  the
          children at [28-29] and [38] of his decision.   This  has  clearly
          informed the overall assessments made and this  ground  of  appeal
          is without merit.  Ground 3 is also without any merit.  It  refers
          to the respondent's policy on British  citizen  children,  without
          acknowledging  that  the  appellant's  children  are  not  British
          citizens.  I therefore turn  to  ground  2,  the  only  ground  of
          appeal relied upon by Mr Ahmed in his very brief submissions.

       7. Judge Forster was satisfied that it would be  reasonable  for  the
          children to return with their  mother  at  [30]  by  reference  to
          276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.   This  provision  largely
          mirrors s. 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  Although Judge  Forster  made
          no reference to the relevant authorities,  when  the  decision  is
          read as a whole his findings have been reached in  line  with  the
          principled approach to s. 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  as  established
          in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53, and applied  more  recently
          in SSHD v AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661.   For
          the  purposes  of  this  appeal  two  fundamental  principles  are
          important to highlight:  (i)  the  approach  to  the  question  of
          reasonableness in s. 117B(6)(b) is child-focussed and  should  not
          include a balancing of the conduct and immigration history of  the
          child's parents, (ii)  but  the  record  of  the  parents  may  be
          indirectly material if it leads to their ceasing to have  a  right
          to remain here, such that reasonableness  must  be  considered  in
          the real world in which children find themselves.  In other  words
          the  real  world  forms   the   background   against   which   the
          reasonableness assessment is assessed.


       8. Whilst Judge Forster made  reference  to  the  appellant  and  her
          children not having the right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom,
          and the appellant's immigration history at [32], this was done  by
          way of background to explaining  the  "real  world"  scenario  the
          family found themselves in.  This is  not  inconsistent  with  the
          correct approach summarised in the authorities I have referred  to
          above.  Whilst Judge Forster may have used language that  is  less
          than clear at certain points and failed to direct himself  to  the
          well known  up  to  date  authorities,  his  assessment  does  not
          contain a material error of law.  Mr  Ahmed  invited  me  to  find
          that  Judge  Forster  was  wrong  to  suggest  that  there  was  a
          requirement of adverse impact on the children and / or  compelling
          circumstances for the effect to be unreasonable. However  each  of
          the observations in [32] were open to the judge, and  he  was  not
          applying a higher threshold than that clarified in KO (Nigeria).

       9. Even if I am wrong about this, I am satisfied that  any  error  in
          taking into account the appellant's immigration history is  not  a
          material error of law.   This  is  because  on  any  view  of  the
          family's accepted circumstances this is  a  case  in  which  there
          could have only been one  outcome  when  KO  Nigeria  is  properly
          applied: notwithstanding the length of the  children's  residence,
          in the real world it would not be unreasonable to expect  them  to
          leave with their mother to reside  in  Pakistan,  the  country  of
          their citizenship.  The children are both  healthy,  as  is  their
          mother.  Their mother is well educated and on the  FTT's  findings
          of fact will be able to adequately care for the children with  the
          help of her extended  family  in  Pakistan.   The  claim  that  s.
          117B(6)(b) could be met, and the  related  Article  8  appeal  was
          therefore bound to fail on any legitimate view.

Decision

      10. The FTT's decision did not involve the making of an error  of  law
          and I do not set it aside.




Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
19 September 2019
