

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/11979/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |    Decision Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2017                    |    On 3 January 2018          |
|                                       |                               |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    K A G
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms N Loughran of Loughran & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Green promulgated on 16  August  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


3. The Appellant was born on 17 July 1980. He says  he  is  an  undocumented
Bidoon from Kuwait.

4. The appellant arrived in the UK on 18 April 2016. He claimed asylum  that
day. On 14 October 2016 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Green ("The Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 3  November  2017  Designated
Judge Shaerf gave permission to appeal stating

      The first ground of appeal is that the Judge erred in consideration of
      the  background  evidence  relating  to  the  1965  census   and   its
      consequences  for  an  undocumented  Bidoon.  The  appellant's  bundle
      included extensive background evidence including from the  respondent,
      the US Department of State, Amnesty  International  and  Human  Rights
      Watch. The Judge made no reference to any of these and consequently it
      is not clear to the losing party upon what basis the  Judge  has  made
      findings about the 1965 census and  its  consequences:  see  paragraph
      16(i) of his decision.


      The second ground for appeal challenges the Judge's treatment  of  the
      evidence of the appellant's supporting witnesses. The  grounds  assert
      the Judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  his  analysis  of  the
      evidence leading him not to give weight to their evidence.


      While the second ground is the weaker of the two grounds, I  find  the
      first ground discloses an  arguable  error  of  law  and  so  I  grant
      permission to appeal.

The Hearing

6. As soon as Ms Loughran moved the grounds of appeal, Ms O'Brien,  for  the
respondent, told me that she was departing from the rule 24 notice dated  16
November 2017 and no longer resisted the appeal. Ms  O'Brien  told  me  that
the issue of registration for Kuwaiti Bidoons is complex, and the Judge  had
failed to make clear reference to the objective materials that  were  before
him. In addition, the Judge does not give  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting
the evidence of witnesses who had been granted refugee status.

7. On joint motion, I was  asked  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
because of the extent of the further fact-finding required and  because  the
credibility of the appellant's witnesses requires assessment.

Analysis

8. At Paragraph 16(i) of the decision the Judge considers  the  Home  Office
COI dated July 2016. The appellant's bundle  included  extensive  background
evidence including the US State Department report, an Amnesty  International
report, and a Human Rights Watch report. The Judge  makes  no  reference  to
the background materials produced by the appellant.  The  central  issue  in
this case is whether or not the appellant is an  undocumented  Bidoon.  That
is a complex issue which requires analysis of the background materials.  The
decision requires more careful consideration of  the  1965  census  and  the
registration requirements between 1996  & 2000 or in 2010.

9. At [9] and [10] the Judge records that two  witnesses  gave  evidence  in
support of the appellant. Both of those witnesses have been granted  asylum.
Although the Judge summarises the evidence that each witness gives, he  does
not explain (when dealing with their evidence at 16(v)) why he  rejects  the
majority of their evidence. He does  not  explain  why  he  finds  that  the
evidence of witnesses who have been granted refugee status  as  undocumented
Bidoons "does not add anything to the appellant's claim..."

10. In AC (Somalia) 2005 UKAIT  124  the  Tribunal  said  the  fact  that  a
witness has been granted refugee  status  does  not  compel  an  Immigration
Judge to believe her evidence about the basis on which she was granted  that
status.  Whereas  evidence  at  a  hearing  is  tested  by  the  adversarial
procedure and the Judge must give reasons for his  findings,  the  grant  of
status by the Home Office is a purely administrative decision, taken on  the
papers and with no reasons given.  It carried weight  as  evidence  but  was
not to be compared with the determination of a Judge following a hearing.

11. In AC (Somalia) a distinction is drawn between an  administrative  grant
of refugee status and a grant of refugee status following a  hearing  before
the First-tier Tribunal. The Judge does not  properly  consider  the  weight
that should be given to the appellant's witnesses' evidence.

12.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

13. As the decision is tainted by material  error  of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. Parties' agents ask me to remit this  case  to  the  First  -tier.  I
consider whether or not I can substitute my own decision, but  find  that  I
cannot do so because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

16. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Glasgow  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Green.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

18. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated  on  16  August  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 28 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




