
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11761/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 15th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Solicitor, Brar & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Afghanistan  who  entered  the  UK
    illegally,  and  who  then  claimed  asylum  on  19  April  2016.  That
    protection claim was refused on 13 October 2017.   His  appeal  against
    that refusal came before the First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 26
    June  2017,  when  it  was   heard   by   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Heatherington. The appeal was allowed on asylum grounds in  a  decision
    promulgated on 4 July 2017, although no reference was  made  to  either
    the humanitarian protection appeal, or, the human  rights  appeal  that
    were before him within that decision.

 2. The Respondent's application for permission to appeal  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on 21 November 2017 on all of  the  grounds
    advanced. The Respondent had  taken  a  number  of  credibility  points
    against the Appellant in the course of giving reasons for  the  refusal
    of his protection claim. She argues that the  Judge  failed  to  engage
    with them in the course of his decision. Moreover, the Appellant having
    failed to  attend  the  hearing  and  thus  submit  himself  to  cross-
    examination, she argues that it was not open to  the  Judge  to  baldly
    accept as truthful the contents of his most recent  witness  statement,
    and then without more, simply allow the appeal. She argues  that  there
    is no adequate consideration of the issue of internal  relocation.  She
    argues that there is  no  reference  to  any  of  the  current  country
    guidance decisions upon Afghanistan in the course of the decision.

 3. Before me Mr McVeety confirmed that he did not seek to argue  that  the
    Judge was bound to dismiss the appeal simply because the Appellant  had
    failed to attend the hearing. His argument was that the Judge was  duty
    bound to engage with the Respondent's case, and to  consider  what  (if
    any) weight could be attached to the written evidence of  an  Appellant
    who had failed to  attend  the  hearing  of  his  own  appeal,  without
    offering any explanation for that failure, and who had thus  failed  to
    adopt that written evidence as his own, confirm its  truth,  or  answer
    any questions upon it.

 4. Neither party criticised before me  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant had been properly served with notice of the hearing, and that
    he had failed to attend that hearing without offering  any  explanation
    for his failure. (None has been offered subsequently  either.)  Neither
    party criticises the Judge's conclusion that in those circumstances  it
    was appropriate to proceed with the hearing in the Appellant's absence.
    Moreover, both parties accept that the  question  of  the  weight  that
    could be attached to the content of the Appellant's  written  evidence,
    and, the record of his interviews, was a matter for the Judge.

 5. Stripped of its recitals, and the  passage  dealing  with  the  Judge's
    decision concerning whether or not he should adjourn the hearing,  this
    was on any view a very brief decision. Whereas the three  sentences  of
    paragraph 8.3 are each devoted to what had been identified in paragraph
    3.2 as the  undisputed  question  of  the  Appellant's  nationality  of
    Afghanistan, the only reference to the credibility points taken by  the
    Respondent is the single sentence in paragraph 8.6  that  asserts  that
    the  witness  statement  filed  for  the   hearing   "reconciles"   the
    Appellant's previous and inconsistent accounts. The  Judge  appears  to
    have been entirely untroubled by the failure of the Appellant to  adopt
    that evidence at the hearing, and the decision fails to explain to  the
    reader what effect that failure had upon the assessment of  the  weight
    the Judge felt able to accord that material.  There  are  in  fact  two
    witness statements within the Appellant's bundle of documents, together
    running for fourteen pages. There is no analysis of their content to be
    found within the decision, nor any analysis of the  credibility  points
    taken by the Respondent.

 6. The parties were agreed before me that the only reference to the  issue
    of internal relocation within the decision is  the  six  word  sentence
    that is to be found within paragraph 8.9 "He cannot relocate and remain
    safe". I am satisfied that this finding is  entirely  unexplained,  and
    that no evidential basis is offered by the  Judge  for  it  within  the
    decision. The parties were further agreed that the decision contains no
    reference to any of the relevant jurisprudence concerning  Afghanistan.
    For my own part I am satisfied  that  not  only  is  there  no  express
    reference to any of the country guidance, but the  decision  cannot  be
    fairly read as demonstrating that the Judge had  any  of  the  relevant
    guidance in mind, or, that he rehearsed adequately within the  decision
    any of the salient issues.

 7. Although Mr Selway was not prepared to concede any of the criticisms of
    the decision advanced by the Respondent it is  in  my  judgement  plain
    that this is a decision that is unsafe. I am  not  satisfied  that  its
    content demonstrates that either of the parties enjoyed a fair  hearing
    of the appeal.

 8. Thus the decision must be set aside and remade. In circumstances  where
    it would appear that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
    considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of  law
    has been to deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be
    properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the
    Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.  Moreover  the  extent  of  the
    judicial fact finding exercise required is such that having  regard  to
    the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should  be
    remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of  the  Practice
    Statement of 13 November 2014. To that end I remit  the  appeal  for  a
    fresh hearing by a judge other than Judge Heatherington  at  the  North
    Shields Hearing Centre, with a Dari interpreter booked.

 9. As directed at the  hearing,  the  Appellant  shall  file  any  further
    evidence to be relied upon by 5pm on 3 April 2018. The remitted hearing
    shall be listed on the first available date after 10 April 2018.

Notice of decision

10. The decision promulgated on 4 July 2017 did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
