
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11676/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House             |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                  |Promulgated                    |
|On 25 April 2017                  |On 06 July 2017                |
|                                  |                               |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                       Mr Fahad HRAIZ saiWAN ALNAWADI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adebayo a solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Stanton a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 July 1986.

2.    The appellant came to the UK stowed on  a  lorry  11  April  2016  and
    claimed asylum.

3.     The  respondent  refused  the  application  for  asylum/human  rights
    protection on 7 October 2016. The appellant appealed that  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal on 25th of October 2016. Judge  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  O'Malley  (the  immigration   judge)   considered   the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision at a hearing on 13
    December 2016. She decided that the appellant, who  was  from  Nasiriya
    originally, had not given a credible account of his alleged  assistance
    for the coalition forces via a private company or  companies  in  Iraq.
    In particular, the immigration judge did not accept that the  appellant
    had fled from Nasiriya in 2009 as a result  of  threats.  Nor  did  the
    immigration judge accept that the appellant worked for British security
    in Basra until he was threatened by masked strangers  at  his  door  in
    2015. The appellant's account of having left  Iraq  in  2015  was  also
    rejected.

4.    Furthermore, the immigration judge took account of section  8  (4)  of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act  2004  (section
    8) which requires a deciding authority consider the weight to attach to
    a failure on the part of the claimant to take advantage of a reasonable
    opportunity to make an asylum or human rights' claim while  in  a  safe
    country. The appellant had travelled through Europe, including Holland,
    where he was detained, France, for 6 - 7 months, and Germany, which  he
    had travelled through quickly to  avoid  being  fingerprinted.  It  was
    inconceivable that the genuine refugee would not have  made  an  asylum
    claim when one of these opportunities arose so.

The Upper Tribunal hearing

5.     At  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the   appellant   was
    represented by Mr Adebayo, who submitted that the immigration judge had
    been wrong in her  approach  to  credibility.  She  had  over  inflated
    importance of the appellant's failure to claim asylum in a  safe  third
    country or take account of  his  explanation,  namely,  that  he  spoke
    English and that he regarded his  prospects  of  successfully  claiming
    asylum to be "worse" in third country  such  as  France.  Secondly,  Mr
    Adebayo referred to the evidence called on behalf's client at the  FTT.
    This included a detailed witness statement from one Alex Mc Donald  who
    stated in his witness statement that he was a British national who knew
    the appellant since 2011. The appellant  formed  a  close  relationship
    with Mr McDonald, who was called to give  oral  evidence.  Mr  McDonald
    stated that he worked for the  British  Army  between  2003  and  2010,
    serving in the Royal military police. He claims that appellant  Farhad,
    worked as an interpreter and trainer for the Chinese National petroleum
    company.  It was argued that Mr McDonald went some way to corroborating
    the appellant's account. In addition, there  was  a  witness  statement
    from Muslim Abed, another Iraqi  national,  who  claimed  to  know  the
    appellant when it was in Iraq.  Mr  Abed,  who  also  worked  with  the
    appellant, was not called to  give  oral  evidence.  However,  he  also
    stated in his witness statement that he knew  the  appellant  from  the
    time he was an interpreter and "had problems  as  a  result".  Mr  Abed
    claimed  he  had  fled  Iraq  and  claimed  asylum  in  the  USA.  That
    corroborated the appellant's account, it was argued.  Mr  Adebayo  also
    referred me to a number of documents in the appellant's  bundle  before
    the  FTT.  These  included  Mr  Abed's  "commercial  licence",  various
    certificates which had been issued and a document suggesting  that  the
    appellant was part of the security team of security personnel  dated  1
    August 2014. I was also referred to some documents in the  respondent's
    bundle, which included an untranslated identity card for the appellant,
    Iraqi birth certificates for the appellant and some documents from Alex
    McDonald. It was argued that the immigration judge had not demonstrated
    that he had fully taken this evidence  into  account.  He  should  have
    accepted that the appellant that a trainer and interpreter at  BP  PLCs
    Iraqi subsidiary. Finally, the immigration judge found  inconsistencies
    in the appellant's account (see paragraph 57  of  his  decision)  which
    were not justified.

6.    Mr Adebayo also submitted that the immigration judge had erred in  her
    consideration of the risk on return. He referred me to the case of   BA
    [2017] UKUT00018 where the  upper  Tribunal  identified  the  level  of
    general violence in Baghdad city was such as to create a risk on return
    to a number  of  categories  of  person.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    appellant would fall within one such category of  person,  although  he
    acknowledged that the case  above  was  not  decided  until  after  the
    hearing of this appeal (BA having been decided  on  17  January  2017).
    Nevertheless, it was submitted  that  it  was  an  error  of  law.  The
    appellant feared the Mahdi army and hack militia. On both grounds I was
    invited to set aside the decision First-tier Tribunal  and  remake  the
    decision or remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing. It was acknowledged that if I was to find that the only  error
    related to the risk on return, it would be  appropriate  to  leave  the
    findings of fact made by the FTT in place but  reach  a  written  fresh
    conclusion on the question of risk on return.

7.    It was submitted by Mr Stanton on behalf of the  respondent  that  the
    immigration judge had demonstrably considered all relevant  factors.  I
    was referred to the conclusion at paragraph 7 to the  effect  that  the
    appellant had "inflated" his role and conflated  the  identity  of  the
    private companies, with which he was concerned, with the  multinational
    national force in Iraq. He said that the immigration judge had made  an
    assessment all the evidence but concluded that the  appellant  had  not
    been the focus of the threats that he claimed to have been subject  to.
    The immigration judge noted that the appellant had worked for the  same
    company for a period  of  about  6  years  without  any  risk  to  him.
    Furthermore, I was referred to paragraph 49 of the decision of the  FTT
    where the immigration judge concluded that the appellant had  not  been
    solely employed to interpret. He accepted the evidence from  a  variety
    of sources to the effect that the appellant had in fact  been  employed
    as a security  worker  rather  than  an  interpreter.  His  ability  to
    communicate in English would have been an important asset in that  role
    as there were a number of international companies working  in  Iraq  at
    that time. Furthermore, Mr Stanton submitted that section 8 of the 2004
    Act was very much a live issue in that the appellant had passed through
    numerous safe countries, sometimes spending long  periods  of  time  in
    them through the, en route for the UK. He had deliberately  evaded  the
    authorities  in  some  of  those  countries.  It  was  right  for   the
    immigration judge to keep section 8  at  the  forefront  of  her  mind,
    therefore, as appears to have happened.

8.    Paragraph 61  of  the  decision  showed  that  the  immigration  judge
    rightly considered the issue of risk on return  having  concluded  that
    the appellant did not qualify as a refugee. He rightly  concluded  that
    the appellant could contact the police in the event that he was at risk
    from Abo Khazal, the alleged source of the threats of violence together
    with the Al Mahdi army. In  any  event,  the  appellant  was  not  from
    Baghdad and the case of BA was not directly relevant therefore.

9.    Mr Adebayo responded briefly to say that the militia were  in  control
    of Basra at date of the hearing and the police and security forces were
    inadequate in Iraq.

10.   The end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to whether there  was
    a material error of law in the decision of the FTT and if so what steps
    should be taken to ensure the decision was fair.

Discussion

11.   As the respondent observed in her rule 24  response,  the  immigration
    judge did not accept the appellant had been employed as an  interpreter
    but this was one of a number of roles  the  appellant  had  within  the
    company  he  worked  for.  The  immigration  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been employed between 2009  and  2015  for,  essentially,
    "the same company". One of the companies written through the  concerned
    was initially called Ardan security. That company changed names but the
    management  stayed  the  same.  Those  companies   were   international
    companies registered in the USA, the U  K  and  Iraq.  The  immigration
    judge accepted that the appellant had been employed as a security guard
    but concluded that,  although  he  had  some  command  of  the  English
    language, he was not employed as such as an  interpreter.  Indeed,  the
    appellant had sought  to  exaggerate  his  role  and  to  conflate  the
    identity of the companies with which he worked so as  to  "bolster  his
    claim for asylum".

12.   Permission to appeal was given on the  grounds  that  the  immigration
    judge may have erred in her approach to credibility in the light of the
    case of CG (Iraq) [2007] UKAIT 00046.  It was feared  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chapman that in the light of the country  guidance  case
    referred to the appellant may be at risk on return to Iraq.

13.   In fact, there is a more recent country guidance case in the  form  of
    B A [UKUT00018. In that case the Upper Tribunal was concerned with  the
    safety of return to Baghdad. It held that evidence showed that a person
    who work for a non-security related Western international company which
    collaborated with coalition forces  in  Iraq  would  be  likely  to  be
    perceived to have collaborated in  areas  under  ISIL  control  but  in
    Baghdad itself there was a low level of risk from  such  groups.  There
    had been an increase in levels of violence  within  that  city  but  it
    would  depend  on  the  facts  of  each  case  whether  an  individual,
    particularly a Sunni Muslim, would be at risk.

My conclusions

14.   Although it was argued that the immigration judge had exaggerated  the
    degree of damage to the appellant's credibility in  his  assessment  of
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants)  Act
    2004, I find that the appellant's failure to claim asylum  in  Holland,
    France and Germany is striking. This is particularly so in that he  was
    detained and fingerprinted in Germany, a country that  has  welcomed  a
    large number of asylum seekers. This the judge was entitled to conclude
    that the appellant was not a genuine refugee given his failure to  make
    any claim in these countries. I do not find that the immigration  judge
    exaggerated this point  or  attached  excessive  weight  to  the  above
    statute.

15.   Secondly, and more significantly, it was  said  that  the  immigration
    judge had failed to attach adequate and sufficient weight to  the  fact
    that the appellant had produced a witness  statement  from  one  Muslim
    ABED, who, I was informed, had subsequently successfully claimed asylum
    in the USA. Mr Abed is alleged to have been the  appellant's  colleague
    and he provided a witness statement to the tribunal but did not  attend
    the hearing. Mr Abed was said to be one of three  instructors  who  had
    other  roles  but,  as  the  immigration  judge  pointed  out   between
    paragraphs 50 and 53 of her decision, there is no adequate  explanation
    of Mr Abed's role or the work that he did. The  immigration  judge  did
    have the evidence of Mr McDonald but the immigration judge rejected  Mr
    MacDonald's evidence to the effect that the appellant was relied on  as
    an interpreter. I find that the immigration  judge  was  not  bound  to
    attach any greater weight the evidence of Mr Abed, given  that  he  had
    not given oral evidence and that very little detail  of  his  work  was
    provided to the tribunal.

16.   I am also unpersuaded that the immigration judge's failure to  mention
    corroborating evidence from the appellant, such as the identity  cards,
    had led to  any  identifiable  error  of  law.  Unfortunately  for  the
    appellant, the immigration judge did not find the appellant's  evidence
    at all credible. He considered that the account surrounding the posting
    of a threatening message through "his door" in paragraph 55 et seq  was
    not thought to be credible, particularly  since  this  came  after  the
    appellant had worked for, essentially, one company for six years.

17.   The immigration judge did consider the risk on return at paragraph  63
    of his decision.  His  view  that  the  appellant  could  if  necessary
    relocate to Baghdad is more questionable, in the light of the case of B
    A [2017] UK UT00018. However, the  immigration  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had a family support network in Nazirya and  therefore  could
    safely return to his home town. Accordingly, whether or not it was safe
    for the appellant to return to Baghdad, was not a material issue in the
    case and it follows that the country guidance  case  mentioned  was  of
    peripheral importance in this regard.

18.   The immigration judge had regard to  recent  case  law  including  the
    leading case of C G in  2007  but  fundamentally  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's account, believing it to have been  exaggerated  and  to  a
    large degree incredible. In this context, the  appellant's  failure  to
    claim asylum at the first opportunity was a  material  matter  for  the
    when weighing up the evidence. Overall his conclusions appear  to  have
    been open to him on the evidence before him and an appeal court  should
    be reluctant to interfere with an assessment that has been carried  out
    after hearing oral evidence from  two  witnesses  and  having  made  an
    appraisal of the written documentation.

Decision

19.   For these reasons this appeal is dismissed. The  appeal  is  dismissed
    on asylum grounds.

20.   The appeal is also dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.

21.   The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

22.   No anonymity direction was made by the FtT and  I  make  no  anonymity
    direction.



Signed


Date





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signature   William Hanbury  Dated this 3 July 2017

