
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11193/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a hearing|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 November 2019                        |On 29 November 2019             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                   N M M E
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 11 November 2019 I gave the following directions:-

         "1.      It is my preliminary view that, on  consideration  of  the
             grounds of appeal, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
             involved the making of an error of law in  failing  to  follow
             the established case law with respect to the  appellant  as  a
             member of the Berti tribe, and so a non-Arab  Darfuri.    That
             position is reinforced by the  more  recent  country  guidance
             decision, AAR & AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - return)  Sudan  [2019]
             UKUT 282 (IAC), handed down on 10  July  2019  confirming  the
             applicability of earlier guidance.

         2. In MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015]  UKUT  10  (IAC)  the  guidance
             given was:

                  In the country guidance case  of  AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris-
                  relocation) Sudan CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00056,  where  it  is
                  stated that if a claimant from Sudan is a non-Arab Darfuri
                  he must succeed  in  an  international  protection  claim,
                  "Darfuri" is to be understood as an ethnic  term  relating
                  to origins, not as a  geographical  term.  Accordingly  it
                  covers even Darfuris who were not born in Darfur.

         3. Accordingly, and in the light of the unchallenged  finding  that
             the appellant is a member of the Berti tribe, I propose to set
             the decision aside and to remake the  decision,  allowing  the
             appeal on asylum and human rights grounds (article 3)  without
             the need for an oral hearing.

         4. Unless within ten working days of the issue of these  directions
             there is any written  objection  to  this  course  of  action,
             supported by cogent argument, the Upper Tribunal will  proceed
             to determine the appeal  without  an  oral  hearing  and  will
             substitute a decision allowing the appeal on asylum and  human
             rights grounds.

         5. In the absence of a timely response  by  a  party,  it  will  be
             presumed that it has no objection  to  the  course  of  action
             proposed."

 2. On 27 November 2019, the respondent wrote to the Upper Tribunal stating
    that they accept that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error of law and inviting the Upper Tribunal to  allow
    the appeal on the basis that the appellant has a well founded  fear  of
    persecution.

 3. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law and  I  set  it
    aside. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds.



Summary of conclusions

      1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
         of an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds


Signed      Date: 28 November 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
