
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/11602/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                                                 | |
|Decision & Reasons Promulgated                                       | |
|On 13 April 2018                                                     | |
|On 26 April 2018                                                     | |
|                                                                     | |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                   ABU [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro (counsel) instructed by Hunter Stone Law

For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  AA Wilson promulgated on 15 December 2017,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds .

Background


3.    The Appellant was born on [ ] 1990 and is a  national  of  Bangladesh.
The appellant entered the  UK  as  a  student  on  14  September  2009.  The
respondent  extended  leave  to  remain  until  23  September  2014.  On  17
September 2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the  UK  outside
the rules. That application was refused on 22  December  2014.  On  2  March
2016 the appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  the
Immigration  (EEA)   Regulations   2006.   The   respondent   refused   that
application. On 27 June 2017 the appellant made  a  protection  claim  which
the respondent refused on 26 October 2017.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge AA Wilson ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  15  January
2018, Judge Shimmin gave permission to appeal stating

    "1.    The appellant seeks permission to appeal against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge AA Wilson promulgated on  15  December  2017,
    dismissing the appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse international protection.


    2.     It is arguable that the Judge has erred in  law  in  failing  to
    consider,  or  properly  consider  with   sufficient   reasoning,   the
    appellant's human rights claim.


    3.     It is arguable that the Judge has materially erred in failing to
    consider the background evidence before him relating to the appellant's
    assertions that the authorities are monitoring Facebook activities.


    4.     It is arguable the Judge has materially erred in failing to give
    adequate reasons why the appellant would not  be  at  risk  on  return,
    having been an activist in the UK.


    5.     I grant permission on all grounds."

The Hearing

5. (a)      For the appellant Mr Jorro  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
reminded me that the appellant is a Bangladeshi national and  told  me  that
the Judge accepts the  appellant's  account  that  he  has  been  a  student
activist both in Bangladesh and in the UK. He told me that the  Judge  found
that the appellant has a political profile, but at [8] of the decision,  the
Judge  says  that  he  cannot  find  objective  evidence  to   support   the
appellant's claim to be at risk on return. He took me to page  405  and  406
of the appellant's bundle and told me that there is clear evidence that  the
Bangladeshi authorities monitor social media, including  Facebook  accounts.
He told me that the appellant has railed  against  the  current  Bangladeshi
government on his Facebook account

(b)   He told me that the Judge failed to take account of material  evidence
in  reaching  his  decision.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge's  decision  is
inadequately reasoned, and that the Judge fails to resolve conflicts in  the
evidence. He referred me to a number of pages in  the  bundle  of  materials
which was before the Judge which, he said, the Judge did  not  take  account
of, and which, he said, are fully supportive of  the  appellants  claim.  Mr
Jorro told me that the Judge's consideration of the risks to this  appellant
on return to Bangladesh betrays a lack of anxious scrutiny of  the  evidence
provided.

(c) Mr Jorro told me that the decision is devoid  of  consideration  of  the
appellants ECHR grounds of appeal. He urged me to set  the  decision  aside.
He reminded me that a rule 15 (2A) notice has been intimated.

6. (a)      For the respondent, Mr Clarke told me  that  the  decision  does
not contain errors,  material  or  otherwise.  He  took  me  to  the  second
sentence of [11] of the decision, where  the  Judge  records  that  no  ECHR
grounds of appeal were argued before him. He said that the Judge  cannot  be
faulted for the absence of findings on matters which were not placed  before
him.

(b)   Mr Clarke took me to the background materials and told  me  that  they
did  not  support  the  appellant's  claim  that  his  Facebook  account  is
monitored by the Bangladeshi authorities. He told me  that  the  Judge  made
findings which were open to the Judge on the evidence placed before him.

(c)   Mr Clarke turned his attention to the third ground of appeal and  told
me that the Judge gave proper consideration to risk on  return.  At  [8]  of
the decision, he told me that, the Judge finds that there is no evidence  of
any interest in the appellant because of his activities in the UK, and  that
at [10] of the decision  the  Judge  found  that  when  the  appellant  left
Bangladesh he was not have any interest Bangladeshi  authorities.  He  urged
me to dismiss this appeal and to allow the Judge's decision to stand.

Analysis

7.    Between [1] and [5] of the decision the Judge sets out the  background
to this case. At [6] and [7] the Judge does little more than  summarise  the
evidence, although some  of  the  Judge's  findings  of  fact  are  filtered
throughout [7] of the decision. The  focus  in  the  Judge's  decision  lies
between [7] and [10]. There, the Judge finds that  the  appellant  has  been
active in BNP politics both in Bangladesh and in  the  UK.  He  bemoans  the
lack of either background or expert evidence, and finds  that  although  the
appellant has  a  political  profile,  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
suggest that there is any risk to the appellant on return to Bangladesh.

8.    At [5] the Judge records that he has evidence  from  Mohammed  Hussain
together with a letter from the general secretary of BJSD and  a  letter  of
support from the president of the BNP in London. At [8]  the  Judge  records
that  that  evidence  is  that  Facebook  activity  is  monitored   by   the
Bangladeshi authorities. At [10] the Judge rejects  the  evidence  from  BNP
members in the UK because they are opposed to the Bangladeshi government.

9.    The Judge does not set out a clear analysis of the  evidence  that  he
heard nor does the  Judge  explain  why  he  rejects  the  evidence  of  the
appellant's witnesses.

10.   The Judge says that he has a 421  page  bundle  of  evidence  for  the
appellant, but no meaningful analysis of  the  evidence  contained  in  that
bundle is  carried  out  in  the  Judge's  decision.  At  page  126  of  the
appellant's bundle there is a document which appears to  be  a  warrant  for
the  appellant's  arrest.  Despite  the  apparent  existence  of  an  arrest
warrant, at [7] and [10] of the decision the Judge does not explain  why  he
finds that there is no risk of prosecution (for this appellant) if  returned
to Bangladesh. At 406 of the appellant's bundle there is  evidence  (in  the
annual Human Rights Report 2016) that the  Bangladeshi  authorities  monitor
social media including Facebook.

11.   The appellant's bundle contains evidence of  Facebook  posts  made  by
the appellant which are  stridently  critical  of  the  current  Bangladeshi
regime.

12.   Although the Judge finds that the appellant has a  political  profile,
the Judge does not carry out a careful  analysis  of  the  evidence  of  the
appellant's supporting witnesses. The Judge incorrectly says  that  none  of
the background material supports the appellant, when in  fact  some  of  the
background material manifestly does  support  his  argument  about  risk  on
return. As a result, there is inadequate consideration of risk on return.

13.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

14.    The  Judge's  treatment  of  ECHR  grounds  of  appeal  is  a  little
confusing. The Judge clearly  dismisses  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human
rights grounds. At [11] the Judge records that

    "There was no human rights matters argued before me."

15.   The original notice & grounds of appeal (bringing  this  case  to  the
First-tier Tribunal) provides no specification of an ECHR ground of  appeal.
There is simply a bald assertion that removal would be  unlawful  under  the
Human Rights Act 1998. There was no  evidence  driving  at  article  8  ECHR
grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

16.   In Sarkar v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
Civ 195, the Court of Appeal indicated that, although Article 8 and  section
55 were mentioned in the Notice  of  Appeal,  where  no  evidence  had  been
adduced or submissions made before the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  support  a
claim under Article 8 of the ECHR, it could be treated  as  abandoned.   The
Court of Appeal said that even if that was wrong there was evidential  basis
for the First-tier Tribunal to find  in  the  appellant's  favour  in  those
circumstances. The Upper Tribunal  could  not  be  said  to  have  erred  in
refusing to allow permission to appeal on that  ground.  Additionally,  when
re-making the decision following the grant of permission  to  appeal  on  an
unrelated ground, section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
Act 2007 did not  require  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  carry  out  a  complete
rehearing of the original appeal.

17.   There is nothing wrong with the Judge's summary dismissal of the  ECHR
ground of appeal. The material error of law in the Judge's decision  relates
to the analysis of the evidence  from  the  appellant's  witnesses  and  the
analysis of the background materials, which leads  to  inadequate  reasoning
in relation to risk on return.

18.   As the decision is tainted by material errors of law  I  must  set  it
aside. I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider  whether
or not I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I  cannot  do  so
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

19.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


20.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

21.   I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge AA Wilson.



Decision

22.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

23.   I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 15 December 2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

