
l
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/11180/2019
      PA/11273/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard by Skype for Business                   |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 20 January 2021                            |On 3 February 2021           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                L A R & K T A
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Jones Whyte
LLP, Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decisions dated 5 November 2019.

     ii) The appellants' grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Clapham, promulgated on 24 April 2020.

     iv) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 27 May 2020.

     vi) The note of argument for the appellants, dated 15 September 2020.

    vii) The respondent's submissions / rule 24 response dated 18  September
         2020.

   viii) The note and directions by UT Judge Smith dated  29  October  2020,
         with a view to a remote hearing.

 2. The technology enabled an  effective  remote  hearing.   There  was  no
    facility to record the hearing, but  representatives  agreed  that  was
    unnecessary.

 3. The grounds, set out in some detail, are enumerated as (1)  failure  by
    respondent  to  verify  documentary  evidence;  (2)  "Mibanga"   point,
    reaching adverse credibility finding at [68] prior to surveying all the
    evidence; and (3) plausibility, (i) - (vi).  They are further  expanded
    upon in the note of argument.

 4. The grant of permission observed that error was contingent  on  whether
    it had been put to the FtT that this was an exceptional case  in  which
    the respondent was required to verify  the  documents  adduced  by  the
    appellants.  The note by UT Judge Smith states that the issue  was  not
    raised in the FtT and the UT will  need  to  consider  whether  it  was
    "Robinson obvious".

 5. Mr Winter's submitted along the lines of the  grounds  and  note.   Mrs
    Aboni submitted that the respondent  had  not  come  under  a  duty  of
    verification; the judge did not  decide  without  considering  all  the
    evidence; and the rest of the grounds were  only  disagreement.   I  am
    obliged to both representatives for their assistance.

 6. I reserved my decision.

 7. To show that the respondent had a duty to  verify  documents  from  the
    lawyer in Iraq, Mr Winter founded firstly on  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2015] 1 WLR 1322, [2014] EWCA Civ 1011, where Fulford  LJ,  with  whom
    the two other judges agreed, said:
     1. In my judgment, there is no basis in domestic or ECHR jurisprudence
        for the general approach that  Mr  Martin  submitted  ought  to  be
        adopted whenever local lawyers obtain  relevant  documents  from  a
        domestic court, and thereafter transmit them directly to lawyers in
        the United Kingdom. The involvement of lawyers does not create  the
        rebuttable presumption that the  documents  they  produce  in  this
        situation are reliable.  Instead,  the  jurisprudence  referred  to
        above  does  no  more  than  indicate  that  the  circumstances  of
        particular  cases  may  exceptionally  necessitate  an  element  of
        investigation by the national  authorities,  in  order  to  provide
        effective protection against mistreatment under article 3 ECHR.  It
        is important to stress, however, that this step will frequently not
        be  feasible  or  it  may  be  unjustified   or   disproportionate.
        In Tanveer Ahmed the court highlighted the  cost  and  logistical
        difficulties that may be involved,  for  instance  because  of  the
        number  of  documents  submitted  by  some  asylum  claimants.  The
        enquiries may put the applicant or his family at risk, they may  be
        impossible to undertake because of the prevailing  local  situation
        or they may place the United Kingdom authorities in  the  difficult
        position of making covert local enquiries without the permission of
        the relevant authorities. Furthermore, given the uncertainties that
        frequently remain following attempts to establish  the  reliability
        of documents, if the  outcome  of  any  enquiry  is  likely  to  be
        inconclusive this  is  a  highly  relevant  factor.  As  the  court
        in Tanveer Ahmed observed, documents  should  not  be  viewed  in
        isolation and the evidence needs to be considered in its entirety.
     1. Therefore,  simply  because  a  relevant  document  is  potentially
        capable  of  being  verified  does  not  mean  that  the   national
        authorities have an obligation to take this step. Instead,  it  may
        be necessary to make an enquiry in order to verify the authenticity
        and reliability of a document - depending always on the  particular
        facts of the case - when it is at the centre  of  the  request  for
        protection, and when a simple process of enquiry will  conclusively
        resolve its authenticity and reliability (see Singh v Belgium [101]
        - [105]). I do not consider that there is any  material  difference
        in approach between the decisions in Tanveer  Ahmed and Singh  v
        Belgium, in that in the latter case  the  Strasbourg  court  simply
        addressed  one  of  the  exceptional   situations   when   national
        authorities should undertake a process of verification.
     1. In my view,  the  consequence  of  a  decision  that  the  national
        authorities are in breach  of  their  obligations  to  undertake  a
        proper process of verification is that the Secretary  of  State  is
        unable thereafter to mount an argument challenging the authenticity
        of the relevant documents unless and until the breach is  rectified
        by a proper enquiry. It follows that if a decision of the Secretary
        of State is overturned on appeal on this basis, absent  a  suitable
        investigation it will not open to her to suggest that the  document
        or documents are forged or otherwise are not authentic.
     1. Finally, in this context it is to be emphasised that the courts are
        not required  to  order  the  Secretary  of  State  to  investigate
        particular areas of evidence or otherwise to direct her  enquiries.
        Instead, on an appeal from a decision of the Secretary of State  it
        is for the court to decide whether there was an obligation  on  her
        to undertake particular enquiries, and if the court concludes  this
        requirement existed, it will resolve whether the Secretary of State
        sustainably discharged her obligation (see NA (UT rule 45: Singh V
        Belgium) [2014] UKUT 00205 IAC). If court finds there was such  an
        obligation and that it was  not  discharged,  it  must  assess  the
        consequences for the case.

 8. The other principal case on which Mr Winter relied was AR v SSHD [2017]
    CSIH 52, where Lord Malcolm gave the opinion of the Court:

           35.  We remind ourselves of the need to examine the  facts  with
           care (sometimes referred to as "anxious scrutiny"), and  of  the
           low standard of proof applicable in cases of this nature ...  We
           recognise that there may be cases where the  concerns  over  the
           veracity of a claimant's account may be so  clear-cut  that  the
           decision-maker is driven to rejection of  supporting  documents,
           even though on their face they appear to be authentic;  but even
           then, given what is at stake, we would expect some consideration
           to be given to easily available routes  to  check  authenticity.
           There is no question that these documents are at the centre of a
           request for international protection.  The decision-maker should
           stand back and view all of the  evidence  in  the  round  before
           deciding which evidence to accept and which to  reject,  and  on
           the proper disposal of the appeal.

 9. Robinson, [1997] EWCA Civ 3090, is the leading case on when it  may  be
    an error of law for tribunals  not  to  deal  with  a  point  which  an
    appellant has not mentioned:
         1.  It  is  now,  however,  necessary  for  us  to  identify   the
            circumstances in which it might be appropriate for the Tribunal
            to grant leave to appeal  on  the  basis  of  an  argument  not
            advanced before the special adjudicator, or for  a  High  Court
            judge to grant leave to apply for judicial review of a  refusal
            of leave by the Tribunal in relation to a point  not  taken  in
            the Notice of Appeal to the Tribunal.
         1. Because the rules place an onus on the asylum-seeker  to  state
            his grounds of appeal, we consider that it would  be  wrong  to
            say that mere arguability should be the criterion to be applied
            for the grant of leave in such circumstances. A  higher  hurdle
            is required. The appellate authorities should of  course  focus
            primarily on the arguments adduced before them,  whether  these
            are to be  found  in  the  oral  argument  before  the  special
            adjudicator or, so far as the Tribunal  is  concerned,  in  the
            written grounds of appeal on which leave to appeal  is  sought.
            They are not required to engage in a search for new points.  If
            there is readily discernible an obvious point of Convention law
            which favours the applicant although he has not taken it,  then
            the special adjudicator should apply it in his favour,  but  he
            should feel under no  obligation  to  prolong  the  hearing  by
            asking the parties for submissions on points  which  they  have
            not taken but which could be  properly  categorised  as  merely
            "arguable" as opposed to  "obvious".  Similarly,  if  when  the
            Tribunal reads the Special Adjudicator's decision there  is  an
            obvious point of Convention law favourable to the asylum-seeker
            which does not appear in the decision, it should grant leave to
            appeal. If it does not do so, there will be a danger that  this
            country  will  be  in  breach  of  its  obligations  under  the
            Convention. When we refer to an obvious point we mean  a  point
            which has a strong prospect of success if it is argued. Nothing
            less will do...

10. I apply the principles around the duty to verify,  and  around  obvious
    points, to the facts of this case.

11. The FtT said at [75] about documents produced by the first  appellants,
    including an arrest warrant, that she had "not  sought  to  have  these
    confirmed by the lawyer"  since  she  had  been  in  the  UK  and  that
    "presumably this could have been a relatively straightforward  matter".
    Not  only  for  absence  of  such  confirmation,  but  for  reasons  of
    discrepancies  and  implausibility,  he  was  led  to   "question   the
    provenance of this paperwork."

12. It has not been suggested that there is anything factually  wrong  with
    the judge's remark that it would have been  relatively  straightforward
    for the appellant, who has to make her case, to ask  from  the  UK  for
    confirmation from the lawyer.

13. The respondent's refusal reasons, and the FtT's reasons, were not  only
    concerned  with  the  lack  of  authenticity  of  the  documents.   The
    documents did go to significant aspects of the case, but it is far from
    clear that much of the uncertainty about the  claims  might  have  been
    removed by efforts to verify.

14. It is exceptional, not routine, for the duty to establish any  part  of
    the case to pass from the appellants to the respondent.  The appellants
    might easily have put it to the respondent  that  theirs  was  such  an
    exceptional case while their claim was being considered; in response to
    the refusal letter; in their grounds of appeal to the FtT; or in  their
    submissions to the FtT.  To spring this as a surprise  at  the  hearing
    would have been unsatisfactory.  It should not have been withheld until
    filing grounds of appeal to the UT.  The appellants have had  the  same
    legal representatives throughout.  No explanation has been advanced for
    advancing this allegedly obvious argument only as an afterthought.

15. Given the nature of this jurisdiction, tribunals are slow  to  penalise
    appellants for procedural failures or for  the  shortcomings  of  their
    representatives.  However, ground  1  fails  not  only  because  it  is
    advanced late, but because it is weak.  The appellants have  not  shown
    that they should have  benefited  from  an  obvious  point  of  Refugee
    Convention law with such strong prospects of success that the  FtT  was
    bound to take it in their favour, although it had never been raised.

16. Ground 2 does not fairly represent the decision.   The  judge  says  at
    [68] that she has major issues with the first appellant's  credibility,
    but that is "notwithstanding the various documents" which she will deal
    with later.  That is not a conclusion against the  appellant,  followed
    by asking if the documents displace it; it is a  consideration  in  the
    round.   Matters must be considered in some order.   It  might  deflect
    criticism to state a conclusion only at the end, but error can be shown
    only by reading a decision fairly and as a whole.

17. Ground 2 (vi) is directed against [78], where the FtT  said  there  was
    "no official medical report".  This is said to overlook that there  was
    a report from a hospital  in  Kurdistan,  and  to  show  inadequacy  of
    assessment, although  it  has  not  been  specified  how  much  further
    examination of that report might have taken the case.

18. Mrs Aboni suggested that the judge had in mind that  nothing  had  been
    obtained in the UK, because she mentions the absence of any  report  on
    consistency  of  injuries  and  narrative  in  terms  of  the  Istanbul
    protocol.

19. The judge might ideally have  been  more  specific,  but  I  think  the
    submission for the respondent is correct.  The  matters  to  which  the
    judge refers would be expected to appear in a report obtained in the UK
    for purposes of asylum proceedings, but not in  hospital  records  from
    Iraq.

20. Beyond that, grounds 2  and  3  are  simply  insistence  and  selective
    disagreement on the facts, presented under legal headings.  They do not
    show that the decision, read  fairly  and  as  a  whole,  contains  any
    errors,  or  is  a  less  than  legally  adequate  explanation  to  the
    appellants why their claims have not been established.

21. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

22. An anonymity direction remains in place.  Unless and until  a  tribunal
    or court directs otherwise, the appellants are granted  anonymity.   No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them
    or any member of their family.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    appellants  and  to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

        Hugh Macleman

      21 January 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




