
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11727/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2017                           |On 9 November 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                             MD YAHIA CHOWDHURY
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C Timson, instructed by Legacy Law Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr J Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robson promulgated 8.5.17, dismissing on all grounds his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  11.10.16,
    to refuse his claim for  international  protection.   Judge  heard  the
    appeal on 7.4.17.

 2. Designated Tribunal  Judge  Shaerf  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    4.9.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 8.11.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision should be set aside.

 5. In essence, the appellant's claim was that he feared persecution due to
    his political opinion arising from  his  membership  of  the  BNP,  and
    opposition to him for that reason by members of the  Awami  League.  He
    claimed that in incidents in 2004 and 2007 he had been attacked. In the
    latter incident, he claimed he had been shot and wounded. After  coming
    to the UK in 2007 he claims he was falsely  accused  in  Bangladesh  of
    involvement in a murder case and the police attended  the  family  home
    with a warrant for his arrest. He relied on a FIR and claimed  that  in
    his absence, he has been sentenced to  life  imprisonment  in  November
    2015. However, despite coming to the  UK  in  2007  and  having  had  a
    previous immigration appeal, did  not  claim  asylum  until  after  his
    detention in April 2016.

 6. At [67] Judge Robson, rejected the appellant's factual  claim  to  have
    been attacked and/or abused as a result of his membership of  the  BNP,
    and also his claim to have been the subject of a  malicious  and  false
    allegation against him at the instigation of the Awami League.  In  the
    circumstances, having rejected the allegation of being charged with and
    sentenced for murder, the judge concluded that relocation would be open
    to the appellant, as there was  no  adverse  interest  in  him  by  the
    police.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Shaerf observed that the First-
    tier Tribunal made no specific finding  on  the  appellant's  political
    involvement or membership of the BNP, described  as  one  of  the  main
    planks of the claim, and that a finding should have been made on  those
    matters.

 8. Whilst it would clearly have been better if  there  had  been  specific
    findings in relation to the claimed BNP membership,  I  find  that,  as
    submitted by the respondent in the Rule 24 reply, the omission to  make
    such findings was not material to the outcome of the claim.

 9. The crucial issue was whether the appellant had a well-founded fear  of
    persecution and his account alleging past persecution by members of the
    Awami League  was  the  key  factual  dispute  in  the  appeal.  Having
    rejected, for the cogent reasons identified in the decision, that  part
    of the claim,  together  with  the  claim  to  have  been  charged  and
    sentenced in his absence for a false allegation of murder, there was no
    basis for the appellant to fear return to Bangladesh  either  from  the
    police or members of the Awami League.  I  note  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal do not challenge in any way those findings of fact  and  address
    only the BNP material and s8.

10. The appellant's membership of the BNP was not directly material to  the
    resolution of the key issues in the appeal. Whilst it was  relevant  in
    the sense that it was the basis for the claimed opposition  to  him  by
    members of the Awami League, the claimed attacks were not found  to  be
    credible, for cogent reasons open to the judge and unchallenged in  the
    grounds. That part of his claim was rejected  in  its  entirety.  Thus,
    even if he were a member of the BNP, a finding as to whether or not  he
    was a BNP member would not have been determinative of  the  outcome  of
    the appeal. Further, even if he did fear the Awami League, for whatever
    reason, the judge concluded that there was no reason why he  could  not
    relocate within Bangladesh, as the judge had found he was not wanted by
    the authorities and thus there was no impediment to relocation.

11. Mr Timson's submission was that membership of the BNP was a main  plank
    of the appellant's case. He also submitted that he would have  been  at
    risk on return for that reason alone. However, that  was  not  how  the
    case was put before the First-tier Tribunal, in the skeleton  argument,
    in oral submissions, or in the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Neither was it raised as a  ground  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Mr  Timson  submitted  that
    the country background evidence demonstrates that membership of the BNP
    is a risk factor in itself, but such  material  was  not  part  of  the
    appellant's bundle at the First-tier Tribunal. I  note  from  the  Home
    Office CIG on Bangladesh: Opposition to the Government, dated  February
    2015, which is with the case papers, that the BNP is listed as  one  of
    the main political parties in the parliamentary democracy. Further,  at
    1.3.9, it states that membership or support of groups  opposed  to  the
    current government does not of itself give rise to a well-founded  fear
    of persecution in Bangladesh. Decision makers must assess  claims  made
    on the basis  of  the  person's  actual  or  perceived  involvement  in
    political opposition to the current government  on  the  facts  of  the
    case, taking account of the nature of the appellant's claimed political
    activity or profile, and the extent to which they may have come to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities and the reasons for that. In cases
    based on  fear  of  ill-treatment  by  members  of  opposing  political
    parties, the threat is likely to be localised and relocation to another
    area of Bangladesh may be viable depending on the nature of the  threat
    from non-state agents and the individual circumstances of the person.

12. In the light of that country background evidence, whether or not it was
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal, there is no  basis  to  conclude
    that mere membership of the BNP would place the appellant at  any  real
    risk sufficient to entitle him to international protection. Further, as
    the judge considered he could relocate, any such fear cannot  be  well-
    founded. In the circumstances, there is no merit in this aspect  of  Mr
    Timson's submission, whether or not it was deployed before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

13. I note that Judge Shaerf found no arguable error of law in relation  to
    s8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act
    2004. This provision was not referred to at all in the decision, though
    the judge did rely on the delay in making the asylum  claim,  which  he
    was entitled to do.  The  grounds  mistakenly  assert  that  the  judge
    placed too much focus and weight on the s8 credibility issue.  However,
    as the grounds quote, that s8 is no more  than  a  reminder  for  fact-
    finding tribunals that conduct which comes within the categories stated
    shall be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  credibility.  In  making
    credibility findings the judge was entitled to rely  on  the  delay  in
    making the protection claim and reject, for the reasons set out at [54]
    the appellant's explanation for that delay, finding the explanation not
    credible.

14. In the circumstances, I find that  the  grounds  disclose  no  material
    error of law.

Conclusion & Decision

15. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons:      No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated
