
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/11904/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 November 2018                      |On 14 January 2019                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     s s
                      (anonymity direction maintained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Appellant in person.
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman promulgated on 18 December  2017  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian  protection  grounds
    and human rights grounds against a decision of the Respondent  dated  3
    November 2017 refusing a claim for asylum in the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a national of Zambia born on  13  January  1979.   His
    immigration history dates back to in  or  about  2001:  there  is  some
    dispute as to its earlier stages which I will comment upon  briefly  in
    due course.  Be that as it may, it does not appear to be disputed  that
    by the end of 2001 the Appellant  had  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a student, and was then  granted  leave
    until 15 September 2002.  A further application for leave to remain  as
    a student was refused  in  January  2004.  A  further  application  was
    ultimately refused on 14 August 2007 with no right of  appeal.   On  16
    August 2007 the Appellant was served with documents indicating that  he
    was liable to be removed from the United Kingdom.  However, it  appears
    that the Appellant did not come to the  attention  of  the  authorities
    again until he was arrested  on  16  February  2017;  he  was  detained
    pending removal.  On 21 February 2017 he made an application for  leave
    to remain pleading Article 8 of the ECHR; the application  was  refused
    on 2 March 2017.  The  Appellant  then  made  a  claim  for  asylum:  a
    screening interview was conducted on 16 August 2017 and  a  substantive
    asylum interview was conducted on 15 September 2017.


3.   The core basis of the Appellant's  asylum  claim  was  that  he  feared
    persecution in his home country on the grounds of his sexuality.


4.   The application for asylum was refused for reasons set out  a  'reasons
    for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 3 November 2017.  The  Secretary  of
    State did not accept that the Appellant was homosexual as claimed:  see
    in particular paragraphs 34-42 of the RFRL.


5.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  He lodged a notice of  appeal  with
    the  assistance  of  representatives   Rockland   Law   of   Newcastle,
    Staffordshire.


6.   In due course the appeal was listed to be heard  in  Birmingham  on  14
    December 2017.  Shortly  before  the  due  hearing  correspondence  was
    received from the Appellant's then representatives  by  way  of  letter
    dated 4 December 2017  saying  that  they  no  longer  represented  the
    appellant "due to funding issues".  The letter included a  "request  on
    his behalf that this matter be adjourned so that he can seek legal  aid
    in order to have a fair hearing".   It  was  also  suggested  that  the
    Respondent's bundle had not been duly served.


7.   The request for an adjournment  was  considered  by  the  Tribunal  and
    refused in a decision of the Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
    Sheldon Court in these terms:

         "The application for an  adjournment  so  that  the  Appellant  can
         obtain a copy of the Respondent's bundle  is  refused  because  the
         bundle was sent on 24 November 2017 and it is assumed  it  has  now
         been delivered.  The appeal will proceed as listed even though  the
         Appellant is without legal representation.  The IAC is a specialist
         Tribunal  and  often  hears  appeals  from  people  without   legal
         representation."


8.   The appeal remained listed for 14  December  2017  on  which  date  the
    Appellant appeared unrepresented before the  Tribunal.   The  Appellant
    renewed his request for an adjournment  orally  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The Judge refused the application and  proceeded  with
    the appeal.  The appeal was  dismissed  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
    Judge's 'Decision and Reasons'.


9.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   He
    was again assisted in this regard by Rockland Law - although  again  in
    due course he appeared at the hearing unrepresented.


10.  The grounds of appeal are in the following terms:

         "The  Judge  should  have   agreed   an   adjournment   given   the
         'vulnerability' and historic mental health issues  evidenced.   His
         GP presented in his letter an ongoing report of his condition since
         2004.  [SS] expressed that he did not feel he could do the  hearing
         without representation.
         The  Judge  wrongly  attempts  to  assess  [SS]'s  psycho-cognitive
         ability for the hearing.  It was appropriate to adjourn the hearing
         in such circumstances.
         At paragraph 17 of the determination it  seems  to  claim/refer  to
         evidence in respect of 'Zimbabwe'.  What was this to do with [SS]'s
         appeal?   The   error   causes   confusion   and   undermines   the
         determination.
         On balance we submit it is fair to re-hear the matter."


11.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird  on
    22 January 2018.  The grant of permission is in these terms:

         "It is arguable that in failing to adjourn the  matter,  the  Judge
         may have acted unfairly in attempting  to  assess  the  Appellant's
         ability to  represent  himself  given  the  accepted  diagnosis  of
         depression  and  the  Appellant's  cognitive  differences   -   see
         paragraphs 24 and 25 of the determination.  An  arguable  error  of
         law has thereby been made."


12.  I pause to  note  that  the  basis  of  challenge,  and  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal, are both on the narrow ground of the  refusal  to
    grant an adjournment.  Judge Bird does not comment upon  the  issue  in
    respect of the reference to Zimbabwe, and does not grant permission  to
    appeal on this point.  I note that whilst it is clearly the  case  that
    the Judge has referred to Zimbabwe rather than Zambia at one  point  in
    the decision (paragraph 17), in overall context it is absolutely  clear
    that this is no more than a slip.  The reference appears in one of  the
    preliminary paragraphs setting out the documentation considered and  is
    essentially in these terms, "I have carefully read and  considered  the
    Respondent's bundle which includes the interviews with  the  Appellant,
    his written account of events in Zimbabwe and the refusal letter."   It
    is clear from all other relevant references in the  decision  that  the
    Judge had well in mind that he  was  dealing  with  an  Appellant  from
    Zambia who was expressing a fear of return to Zambia on  the  basis  of
    conditions in Zambia.  Accordingly, as I say the  issue  before  me  is
    narrow.


13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out  in  the  body  of  the  decision
    evidence  in  relation  to  the   Appellant's   medical   circumstances
    (paragraphs 18 and 19).  I have been able to  cross-refer  the  Judge's
    summary - in particular at paragraph 19 - to the  documents  that  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.   It  seems  to  me  that  the  Judge's
    summation of those documents is appropriate and accurate and  does  not
    omit anything of material impact.  In particular, the Judge  identifies
    a letter  dated  10  January  2012  from  a  clinical  psychologist  in
    neuropsychology which details  something  of  the  Appellant's  medical
    history and his concerns over cognitive deficit.


14.  It may be helpful if I set out in more detail some of the key  passages
    of the neuropsychologist's 'Summary and Conclusions' which are in these
    terms:


         "[SS] is a 32 year  old  gentleman  with  a  history  of  epilepsy,
         complaining  of  short-term  memory,  concentration   and   anxiety
         difficulties.  [SS] also  reports  a  history  of  depression,  and
         current elevated levels  of  distress  (including  some  biological
         features of depression).  With the exception of glaucoma he reports
         on an otherwise insignificant medical and psychiatric history.


         [SS]'s performance on  the  Test  of  Premorbid  Functioning  -  UK
         version (TOPF - UK) and  the  WAIS-IV  verbal  comprehension  index
         provide  an  estimate  of   premorbid   intellectual   and   memory
         functioning in the average range relative to his age matched peers.


         Based on his WAIS-IV performance there is  no  reliable  difference
         between his verbal and non-verbal reasoning  abilities,  with  both
         measured to fall within the average range and at a level consistent
         with estimates of premorbid functioning.


         [SS]'s WMS-IV scores indicate  globally  depressed  memory  indices
         (low average range) when considered in  the  context  of  both  his
         wider level of intellectual functioning and estimates of  premorbid
         functioning.  That said none of his memory index  scores  would  be
         considered impairment relative to  his  age-matched  peers  in  the
         general population.


         [SS]'s psychometric test  performance  also  indicates  a  relative
         weakness in speed of information processing  (WAIS-IV  PSI)  and  a
         possible impairment in divided  attention  (based  on  DKEFS  Trail
         Making Test).


         On balance,  given  the  psychometric  test  results,  his  medical
         history, and the  self-reported  history  and  development  of  the
         cognitive dysfunction, it  seems  most  likely  that  the  relative
         impairments in memory functioning and  divided  attention  and  the
         relative weaknesses in speed of processing  are  secondary  to  the
         epilepsy, possible side effects from the anti-epileptic medication,
         and also elevated levels of psychological distress.  Nonetheless, I
         would  recommend   that   I   provide   [SS]   with   a   follow-up
         neuropsychological assessment in about 9-12 months time in order to
         determine whether the difficulties highlighted in  this  assessment
         are likely to be static or dynamic in nature.


         Although there were mixed reports within the current assessment  in
         relation to both the nature and extent of his current mental health
         difficulties, there did seem to be some  evidence  of  features  of
         depression.  I wonder  whether  he  might  benefit  from  either  a
         Neuropsychiatric assessment or from accessing  IAPT  Mental  Health
         Services within primary care."


15.  It is to  be  noted  that  this  report  is  from  January  2012.   The
    Appellant did not provide anything more  recent  to  suggest  that  his
    underlying difficulties had developed in any significant way.


16.  Further, it is to be noted that whilst the report  suggested  that  the
    Appellant might be slower in his cognitive processing than he once  had
    been, he remained within  the  average  range  for  memory  recall  and
    general function He would not be considered to be impaired relative  to
    age-matched  peers.   The  report  contains  no  suggestion  that   the
    Appellant was unfit to give evidence, or was cognitively impaired  such
    that he was not able to express himself.  In this context it is  to  be
    recalled that there was no apparent difficulty with the manner in which
    he expressed  himself  at  his  interview.   Moreover,  in  seeking  to
    challenge the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  grounds  of
    appeal drafted by his representatives  do  not  identify  any  specific
    difficulty or  limitation  experienced  by  the  Appellant  during  the
    hearing: it is not pleaded, for example, that he felt unable to  follow
    the questions being asked by the Judge  -  and  nothing  is  identified
    within the body of the decision to suggest that the Judge misunderstood
    anything that the Appellant might have said.


17.  It is also to be borne in mind that at  the  core  of  his  claim  were
    matters personal to him and his claimed sense  of  identity.  There  is
    nothing  in  the  supporting  medical  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant would have been unable to articulate such matters before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


18.  Having set out the documentary evidence - including a  summary  of  the
    medical evidence - the Judge gave consideration to the application  for
    adjournment (paragraphs 22-25).


19.  At paragraph 22 the Judge notes the issue in respect of not being  able
    to  afford  to  pay  his  representatives,  and  identifies   that   an
    application for an adjournment had already been refused: he  cites  the
    words of the Designated Judge to the effect  that  the  Tribunal  is  a
    specialist  Tribunal  which  often  hears  appeals  from  unrepresented
    people.  I pause to note in this regard that the  Tribunal  Service  is
    set up as an adjunct to the Court Service with  the  aim  of  providing
    readily available user-friendly access to justice with  less  formality
    and expense. Many Tribunals rarely see legal  representatives  at  all;
    whilst appellants before the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  may  often
    have representation it remains the case that a  significant  number  of
    appellants are unrepresented.  The Tribunal is experienced  in  general
    terms in dealing with unrepresented  appellants,  and  also  there  are
    protocols in place in respect of vulnerable appellants.   It  is  plain
    that on the facts of this particular case that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was aware of such practices and procedures and  brought  them  to
    bear on the facts of this particular case.  It is not a  sine  qua  non
    that an Appellant requires to  be  represented  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The only complicating feature here - absent the  Appellant's
    ability to afford a representative - was the issue of whether or not he
    might have had some significant cognitive deficit.


20.  The Judge considers this key issue at paragraphs 23 et seq..


21.  The Judge notes that the Appellant confirmed that he had  received  the
    Respondent's bundle, and then adds  this  -  "It  was  clear  from  his
    written response that he understood it,  had  replied  to  the  various
    points in it, and had collated documents  which  he  considered  to  be
    relevant to his  appeal."   This  is  a  reference  to  the  bundle  of
    documents that the Appellant filed in the appeal under the heading  'my
    retort' (see First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  at  paragraph  19,
    final bullet point).  The Appellant's  ability  to  provide  a  written
    response to  the  issues  in  the  appeal  and  to  provide  supporting
    documentation adequately paginated and sectioned in itself indicated  a
    significant degree of understanding of  the  issues  that  were  to  be
    considered by the Tribunal.


22.  The Judge then says this at paragraphs 24 and 25:

         "24.  However,  he  asked  for  an  adjournment  in  order  to   be
             represented.  He said he had cognitive problems, and  referred
             me to the medical evidence.  I asked the  Appellant  questions
             about his medical conditions  which  he  was  able  to  answer
             competently   and   without   any   apparent   difficulty   in
             recollection.  He explained that he was  no  longer  receiving
             any specialist care but saw his  GP  each  month  to  get  his
             medication.   He  had  no  plans  in  place  to  seek  further
             representation and did not know how he would be able to do so.


         25.  I noted that the medical evidence was somewhat dated, and  did
             not indicate that there were  significant  difficulties  which
             might  affect  the  Appellant  giving  an   account   of   his
             circumstances.  I noted that he had  done  so  at  the  asylum
             interview.  Bearing  in  mind  the  over-arching  objective  I
             decided that I could deal with the Appellant's  appeal  fairly
             and justly by treating him as a vulnerable person, asking  him
             questions to help him present his appeal, and ensuring that he
             was cross-examined in  an  appropriate  manner.   I  therefore
             decided to refuse the application to adjourn the appeal."


23.  As I have observed above, nothing has been raised  in  the  grounds  of
    challenge to suggest that the  Judge  thereafter  did  not  assist  the
    Appellant by asking him appropriate questions, or that the Judge failed
    to ensure that the  Appellant  was  cross-examined  in  an  appropriate
    manner bearing in mind his vulnerability. Indeed no specific  criticism
    has been made as to the conduct of the rest  of  the  hearing,  and  no
    particularised issue has been raised as to the Appellant's  ability  to
    engage in the hearing.


24.  I have set out the grounds of appeal above.  For completeness I  should
    say that the Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 27  February
    2018 in which the appeal is resisted: it is  essentially  pleaded  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge appropriately noted  that  the  Appellant
    could not afford to pay his representatives and had no plans  in  place
    to seek further representation,  that  the  Judge  had  regard  to  the
    supporting  medical evidence, and that the Judge appropriately  decided
    to proceed on the  basis  that  he  could  facilitate  the  Appellant's
    participation in the hearing by treating him as a vulnerable person and
    making adjustments accordingly.


25.  Before me the Appellant sought to expand upon the grounds of appeal  by
    relating the difficulties that he had had in seeking to obtain  legally
    aided representation ahead of the hearing.  In part this was because he
    had been hoping to be able  to  pay  his  own  representatives  and  so
    perhaps had not sought to  make  alternative  arrangements  with  great
    vigour.  More particularly though, he said that he had been  told  when
    he had approached other potential representatives that  there  was  too
    limited a period of time for representation to be  arranged.   In  this
    regard it was suggested that there had been inadequate time between the
    date of the asylum interview  on  15  September  2017  and  the  appeal
    hearing on 14 December 2017.  It may well be  that  the  Appellant  had
    some difficulties arranging alternative representation, but as  of  the
    date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  the  reality
    was that he had no representation and there were  no  active  plans  in
    place to secure further representation.  In the circumstances I do  not
    see that the Judge can be criticised for deciding - with  reference  to
    what  the  Judge  described  as  the  'over-arching  objective'   (i.e.
    paragraph 2 of the Procedure  Rules)  -  that  it  was  appropriate  to
    proceed with  the  appeal  without  allowing  further  time  to  obtain
    representation.  I am  not  persuaded  that  any  unfairness  arose  in
    consequence.


26.  The Appellant also said that he had been advised by  his  GP  that  the
    letter of 10 January 2012 from the  clinical  psychologist  would  have
    been sufficient in itself to demonstrate  that  he  was  a  person  who
    plainly could not represent himself.  I do not suggest that the GP  did
    not make any such observation; however a GP is not necessarily a person
    with due knowledge and expertise of Tribunal  procedures  and  what  is
    involved  in  presenting  a  case  before  a  Tribunal  which  is  well
    acquainted  with   dealing   with   unrepresented   and/or   vulnerable
    participants.  For my own part I cannot see anything in the  letter  of
    10 January 2012 that suggests a cognitive deficit that would render the
    Appellant unable to put over what he wanted to put over in  respect  of
    his fears of returning to Zambia, or indicate  that  he  was  otherwise
    unable  to  engage  with  questions  from   either   the   Respondent's
    representative or the Tribunal.  It was also the case -  as  the  Judge
    observed - that the Appellant was able to  put  together  a  bundle  of
    documentation  in  relation  to  his  circumstances  and  his  concerns
    motivating his appeal.


27.  In the circumstances I find that  the  grounds  of  challenge  are  not
    established. I do not accept that the Judge fell into error of  law  in
    refusing to adjourn the appeal, or that any  unfairness  resulted  from
    the decision not to adjourn.  Far from it: it  seems  to  me  that  the
    Judge carefully considered the application,  carefully  considered  the
    evidence  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's   medical   circumstances,
    carefully considered the Appellant's ability to engage with the  issues
    in the appeal, and has explained adequately and cogently his  reasoning
    for refusing the adjournment.


28.  Mr SS did  seek  to  raise  some  further  matters.  In  particular  he
    expressed concerns about the earlier part of his  immigration  history,
    and suggested that perhaps he had been portrayed in the  recounting  of
    his immigration history as a person of bad  character.   However,  this
    was not a matter pleaded in the grounds, and necessarily therefore  not
    a matter in respect of which permission to  appeal  had  been  granted.
    Accordingly I did not permit the Appellant to develop such extra  bases
    of challenge before me.


29.  In summary: I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  adequately
    considered the application for adjournment and reached a decision on it
    which was open to him and which he adequately explained; no  consequent
    unfairness is identifiable; in the circumstances there was no error  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal deciding  to  proceed  with  the  appeal
    notwithstanding the Appellant being unrepresented.


Notice of Decision

30.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contained  no  error  of
    law and stands.


31.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 2 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

