
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/11074/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 April 2021                     |On 17 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           SOMASUNDARAN VEERAKUTTY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 31  March  1976.   His
    appeal to the FtT was dismissed by  Judge  P  A  Grant-Hutchison  by  a
    decision promulgated on 19 October 2020.   He  appeals  to  the  UT  on
    grounds set out in detail in his application dated 12 November 2020.

 2. The first point in the grounds is based on the statement in the  expert
    report of Dr Smith at [106] that the appellant might not have  "a  role
    of exceptional significance or importance in the TGTE" but that did not
    mean "ipso facto that he will not be of adverse interest on return".

 3. The grounds and submissions probed into this quite intricately, but  do
    not persuade me that the  decision  shows  that  the  judge  failed  to
    comprehend the plain meaning of that sentence.

 4. The grounds develop this into  an  assertion  of  misunderstanding  the
    report, based on [109], where it says there  is  "clear  evidence  that
    supporters and those associated in any way to the TGTE ... are  ...  at
    ... risk" (emphasis added).

 5. It was this aspect of the grounds which led to the grant of permission,
    but the line was not put to the FtT clearly, if at all.

 6. The report and the submissions for the appellant did not  grapple  with
    how slight an association might suffice, if the  bar  were  to  be  set
    lower than in country guidance.  A fleeting presence on the fringes  of
    one demonstration, or one conversation with a TGTE leader, perhaps?

 7. The judge  was  not  asked  to  depart  from  country  guidance,  which
    discloses a need for protection of those the authorities are likely  to
    perceive  as  having  a  significant  role   in   post-conflict   Tamil
    separatism.  The appellant's case, recorded at [16  b],  was  that  the
    authorities would have "years of evidence" of him being "right  in  the
    thick of things".

 8. The suggestion that even the faintest participation would  do  was  not
    argued.  It is not the consistent thrust of the report.  If  there  was
    any lack of clarity and consistency, it came not from  the  judge,  but
    from the way the appellant put his case.

 9. The assessment of risk through association with the  TGTE  was,  in  my
    view, a matter of fact and degree for the judge to resolve on  all  the
    evidence, applying guidance to his findings.  That is  what  the  judge
    did.  He recognised that the  appellant's  role  did  not  have  to  be
    exceptional.

10. The next point in the grounds is based  on  the  judge's  comment  that
    examples of those at risk identified at [109] of the report are persons
    with involvement "significantly greater" than the appellant, and on his
    finding that the appellant had been "involved in 6 protests and  street
    theatre", although not with "any elevated role", and had "probably been
    identified" (by the Sri Lankan authorities) "as an activist".

11. The grounds take the example of "a well-known traditional  dancer"  who
    performed at many TGTE events in the UK, and argue that "it  cannot  be
    rationally  maintained  that  [her]  involvement  and  status  in   the
    separatist movement has been significantly greater  than  that  of  the
    appellant".

12. This ground is selective.  It also goes too far.  Again, the matter  is
    one of fact and degree.  It was not beyond reason  to  think  that  the
    dancer presented a higher profile than  the  appellant,  who  does  not
    claim to be prominent  among  the  Sri  Lankan  Tamil  diaspora  for  a
    performing skill, or otherwise.  I do not agree that this  finding  was
    irrational, or unsupported by the evidence.

13. The grounds allege that the judge erred in various ways in finding  the
    appellant not to have had a significant role.   Details  are  rehearsed
    from letters, statements, and the opinion in the expert report.  It  is
    said to be "not inconceivable" that  the  judge  might  have  concluded
    differently "if he had taken into account that  the  appellant  was  an
    active supporter of a proscribed organisation".

14. A judge does not have to specify every dot and comma of an  appellant's
    evidence.  It is clear from the decision that the judge understood  the
    case as it was put.  He accepted at [20] that the appellant had a level
    of  involvement.   He  recorded  that  the   TGTE   is   a   proscribed
    organisation.  The decision is all about whether  the  evidence,  as  a
    whole, establishes such a profile that the authorities  might  see  the
    appellant as a threat, and as more than an opportunistic hanger-on.

15. The appellant's grounds and submissions do not show  that  the  judge's
    resolution of that issue is affected by any error on a point of law.

16. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      6 May 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.



