

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/11951/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 September 2019                     |On 2 October 2019                  |
|                                         |                                   |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          DABAN TOFIQ AHMED GOSHTA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Young, of Frew & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as  a  citizen  of  Iraq,  born  on  1
    January 1985.

 2. The appellant said that he was employed as a peshmerga by  the  PUK  in
    Iraqi Kurdistan for 15 years.  He claimed that if he returned, he would
    be at risk as one of those who spoke out against theft by  PUK  leaders
    of materials from building projects,  and due to an altercation in  the
    street with the son of a PUK leader.

 3. The respondent's letter of 4 October 2018, refusing  the  claim,  found
    the evidence that the appellant was employed as a peshmerga was of poor
    quality; noted at [58]  that  by  his  own  account  he  had  not  been
    threatened by the leadership, and found it implausible they would  have
    any  interest  in  him  after  his   resignation;   found   the   court
    documentation relating to the altercation also  of  poor  quality;  and
    declined to accept that he is at any risk  through  the  individual  he
    mentioned.

 4. FtT Judge Handley  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 9 May 2019.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on grounds attached
    to his application dated 21 May 2019.  The main points  were  that  the
    Judge relied upon an inconsistency in dating on a letter,  but  it  had
    since emerged that this was an error of translation  or  transcription,
    and 2013 appeared where this should have been 2011; the judge failed to
    refer to post-interview corrections; and  inadequate  reasons  for  not
    accepting the report of an expert  instructed  for  the  appellant,  in
    absence of a report from the respondent.

 6. The FtT refused permission.  The appellant made an application  to  the
    UT dated 27 June 2019, focusing  on  the  absence  of  "an  alternative
    expert report" and on the translation error, which could  be  rectified
    by "objective and uncontentious evidence".

 7. The UT granted permission on 10 July  2019,  identifying  two  arguable
    points: firstly, the FtT appeared to have gone behind the  respondent's
    concession at a case management review hearing (CMR) that  a  peshmerga
    card produced by the appellant was genuine;  and  secondly,  there  was
    apparent (inadvertent) error over the date, although not  supported  by
    evidence submitted with the grounds.

 8. The appellant applied to the UT  to  produce  further  evidence,  being
    photographs to advance his claim to have been in the peshmerga,  and  a
    corrected translation to substantiate the dating error.  (The originals
    of these items remain in the hands of his representatives.)

 9. It was common ground at the hearing in the UT that the  respondent  did
    not at any stage make the concession perceived by the Judge who granted
    permission.

10. It is not clear how the slip arose, but  it  was  not  induced  by  the
    appellant.  The misconception may  be  due  to  other  documents  being
    copies, whereas the card was a plastic or laminated "original"; but the
    respondent did not accept that it was genuine, or to be taken  at  face
    value of what it purported to show.

11.  Mr  Young  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  by  not  accepting  the
    authentication of the documents by  the  expert,  when  the  respondent
    failed to produce any report to the contrary.

12. While the Judge had to give expert evidence the respect it deserved, he
    was not bound to accept  its  conclusions.   It  remained  for  him  to
    evaluate the report, and the absence  of  a  contrary  report  did  not
    decide any issue.

13. The Judge at [47] gives several reasons: no indication of the  author's
    area of expertise, or  of  his  experience  with  court  documents;  no
    specification of the "original documents of this type"  with  which  he
    made comparisons; and no specification of the sources he  consulted  in
    Kurdistan.

14. Mr Young persuaded me that the point in the middle of  [47]  about  two
    types of summonses is impenetrable, and not a  good  criticism  of  the
    report.  Beyond that, however, no error  is  apparent  in  the  Judge's
    reasoning.   He did not say that he rejected the report,  but  that  he
    had concerns about its reliability and found it of limited  assistance.
    In effect, it did not go against the appellant, but it did not go  very
    far in his favour.  That view was well within judicial scope.

15. There was an error in one of  the  dates  which  first  appeared  on  a
    letter, as set out in the explanation from  the  translators  dated  20
    September 2019.   However, Mr Govan was able to demonstrate  that  this
    does not bear on the point taken by the  FtT  at  [38],  to  which  the
    appellant had no counter.

16. Mr Young submitted also on the grounds  which  go  to  the  appellant's
    corrections  and  amendments  being  overlooked.   One  clear   example
    emerged.  The inconsistency identified over the  appellant's  movements
    at [41] is probably ill-founded, because Sheikh  Jafer  is  (as  sounds
    likely) a person not a place (a misconception which goes  back  to  the
    interview record and the refusal letter).   This point  is  valid,  but
    not enough to undo  a  decision  which  rests  on  various  other  good
    reasons, in which no error has been shown.

17. The case has become entrapped in  whether  the  appellant  was  ever  a
    peshmerga, or involved in a court case, and in minute details.   Taking
    a step back, the evidence that he was a peshmerga may have been neither
    overwhelmingly strong, nor patently a fabrication; but his case did not
    turn on that.  The crux is that he failed to establish that even if  he
    was a peshmerga, either the PUK or anyone  else  has  any  interest  in
    persecuting or ill-treating him if he returns.  He has not  shown  that
    the reaching of that conclusion involved the making of any error  on  a
    point of law, such that it ought to be set aside.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      1 October 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




