

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11494/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated:|
|On 5 October 2018                     |     On 16 November 2018            |
|                                      |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     BLO

                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik      (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.     This  is  the  claimant's  appeal  to   the   Upper Tribunal.    On
5 October 2016 the Secretary  of  State  refused  to  grant  the  claimant
international protection and decided he should be  deported.   The  claimant
appealed and, after a hearing of 6 February 2007, the First-tier Tribunal
dismissed his appeal.  On 9 March 2018 I set aside  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal because it contained errors of law.   My  full  reasons
for setting aside that decision may  be  found  in  my  written  reasons  of
9 March 2018.  But put simply and  briefly,  I  decided  that  the  First-
tier Tribunal had erred through  failing  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
evidence of the claimant's wife (a person I shall  simply  refer  to  as  K)
when considering claims he had made regarding his sexuality; and  had  erred
through failing to properly direct itself with respect to arguments  he  had
pursued under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  (ECHR)
concerning his child.  I directed that there be a complete rehearing of  the
appeal to take place before me in the  Upper Tribunal.  That  hearing  took
place on 5 October 2018 and this is the decision I have made as a result.

The claimant's claim and the previous immigration and adjudication history

2.    The claimant, to whom I have granted anonymity  in  these  proceedings
because of the sensitive nature of certain of the subject matter,  was  born
on 2 December 1985.  He is a national of Nigeria.  In 2004 he applied  for
entry clearance to come to the United Kingdom (UK) as a student.   Although
this was refused, an  appeal  brought  against  that  refusal  decision  was
successful and he entered the  UK  on  24 January 2007  with  leave  until
31 October 2010.  On 10 September 2010  he  obtained  a  certificate  of
approval for marriage and married K who is a  female  British  citizen.   He
was subsequently granted leave to remain as a spouse.  It  seems  that  that
leave expired on 6 December 2012.  On 3 July 2013 he was issued  with  a
removal decision but the Secretary of State did not actually take  steps  to
remove him.  On 11 July 2013 he applied, presumably on the  basis  of  his
marriage, for indefinite leave to remain in the UK.   That  application  was
not immediately determined.  On 29 January 2015 he received a sentence  of
2� years imprisonment for concealing and converting criminal property.  The
sentencing judge referred, in  sentencing  remarks,  to  the  "sophisticated
nature" of the offending and suggested,  seemingly  on  the  basis  of  that
sophistication and the large amount of money involved,  that  the  offending
fell  into  the  "high  culpability"  category  in   terms   of   sentencing
guidelines.  On 14 February 2015 the Secretary of State decided to make  a
deportation order in relation to the claimant.  On 8 May 2015 the Secretary
of State decided to refuse a human rights claim which had been made  by  the
claimant alongside his application for indefinite leave  referred  to  above
and issued him with a signed deportation order.  On  16 December 2015  the
claimant made an asylum and a human rights  claim.   The  asylum  claim  was
based upon a contention that if he were to be deported to Nigeria  he  would
be at risk of being harmed by his half-brother (a man I shall  simply  refer
to as E) as a result of previous family  tensions.   As  to  Article 8,  he
asserted that his marriage to K was still subsisting and said that  the  two
now had a child who had been born on 10 October 2015 and who is a  British
citizen.  The respondent refused all the outstanding claims for reasons  set
out in a document headed "Notice of Decision" but which is in the form of  a
lengthy letter of 3 March 2016 (served on 17 March 2016).

3.    The Secretary of State decided, first of all, that  the  claimant  was
excluded from international protection in  consequence  of  the  content  of
Article 33(2) of the 1951 Refugee Convention  and  section 72(2)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  That was on the basis  that,
having been convicted of  an  offence  in  respect  of  which  he  had  been
sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  two  years,  he  was
presumed to constitute a danger to the UK community.  On the  basis  of  the
same relevant factual background, the Secretary of State  concluded,  having
regard to paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules  that  the  claimant  was
also excluded from  entitlement  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection.
Additionally and in any event, the  Secretary  of  State  decided  that  the
claimant would not be at risk if he were to be returned to Nigeria.   As  to
that, the Secretary of State thought that if E had an  adverse  interest  in
the claimant he would  be  able  to  obtain  protection  from  the  Nigerian
authorities.  The Secretary of State went on  to  give  short  shrift  to  a
claim that the claimant would be at risk at the hands  of  the  organisation
known as Boko Harem or that if he were to have to  perform  national  youth
service that would somehow amount to ill-treatment.  The Secretary of  State
found the Article 8 arguments  to  be  unpersuasive  and  appears  to  have
treated them, primarily, as  amounting  to  an  application  to  revoke  the
deportation order which it rejected.

4.    The claimant then made a further protection  claim  and  human  rights
claim.  This time he said that he is bisexual and would face  risk  on  that
account if returned to Nigeria.  He said that family members had  discovered
his sexuality prior to his leaving Nigeria, that he had been beaten  by  the
police because of it, that he had once been sexually abused by an uncle  and
that he had had some sexual relationships with men whilst  in  Nigeria.   He
said that, since coming to the UK, he had indulged in some  sexual  activity
with males and that he had  been  enjoying  a  sexual  relationship  with  a
particular male British citizen whom I shall  simply  refer  to  as  P.   He
explained that his wife, whilst not at all happy  with  the  situation,  had
agreed to his having such liaisons from time to time subject  to  conditions
including one that he be discreet.  As  to  Article 8,  he  asserted  that,
despite all of the above, his marriage subsisted.

5.    The respondent issued another "Notice of Decision", again in the  form
of a lengthy letter, which is dated 5 October 2016.  In  that  letter  the
Secretary of State, essentially for the  same  reasons  as  before,  decided
once again that the claimant was excluded from the  protection  afforded  by
the 1951 Refugee Convention  in  light  of  his  offending  and  that  that
offending also had the consequence of his being excluded  from  a  grant  of
humanitarian protection.  But anyway, the  Secretary  of  State  disbelieved
the  claimant  regarding  his  sexuality  making  the  point  that  he   had
previously claimed on a different basis and that, if he  had  genuine  fears
due to his sexuality, he would have claimed earlier on that specific  basis.
 The Secretary of State had nothing to add to the reasons why  it  had  been
decided that he could not succeed under Article 8 and that the  deportation
order ought not to be revoked.  It was the 5  October  2016  decision  which
led to the claimant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and to the decision
of that tribunal which I decided to set aside.

6.    As to my task on remaking the decision, the issues were as follows:

            (a)  Is the claimant excluded from the  protection  afforded  by
           the 1951 Refugee Convention?

            (b)  Is the claimant excluded from the benefit  of  a  grant  of
           humanitarian protection?

            (c)  Is the claimant at risk upon return to Nigeria?

            (d)  Can the claimant  rely  upon  Article 8  of  the  ECHR  in
           seeking to have the deportation decision revoked?

7.    With respect to any entitlement to  international  protection  on  the
basis  of  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or  protection   afforded   by
Article 3 of the ECHR, the burden rests upon the claimant.  The standard of
proof is that which is often referred to as the "real risk test".  The  date
for assessment, with respect to all matters, is  the  date  of  the  current
hearing before me.

The evidence

8.    I had much documentary evidence before me.  It included bundles  which
had been prepared for the hearing before the  First-tier Tribunal  and  the
various documents  which  had  come  into  existence  as  a  result  of  the
subsequent application for permission to appeal, the grant of permission  to
appeal and the error of law consideration.   In  addition  to  all  of  that
documentation I had before me an additional bundle filed on  behalf  of  the
claimant and which included original  witness  statements,  updated  witness
statements, some documentation  relevant  to  the  Article 8  issues,  some
documentation relating to the claimant's commission of  a  further  criminal
offence  and  some  background  country  material  concerning  Nigeria.   In
addition to  the  documentary  evidence  I  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
claimant, from K and from P.  I do not propose to set out all  of  the  oral
evidence here but I  shall,  nonetheless,  refer  to  aspects  of  it  where
necessary or otherwise appropriate, when I  am  explaining  the  decision  I
have reached on this appeal.

The submissions of the representatives

9.    Having heard the oral evidence, I heard from the two  representatives.
 Before I say anything further I would wish  to  thank  each  representative
for their clear and concise submissions.  Mr McVeety, for the Secretary  of
State, urged me to conclude that the claimant was excluded  from  protection
as a refugee.  In addition to what had been said about that in the  decision
of 5 October 2016, he had gone on to commit a further offence (about which
I shall say more below) and that undermined his argument that  he  does  not
constitute  a  danger  to  the  UK  community.   Nevertheless,  Mr McVeety
acknowledged that even if the claimant was excluded from  certain  types  of
protection, the protection afforded by Article 3 could not be excluded as a
result of his offending.  As to that, though, he had raised his claimed  bi-
sexuality at a late stage.  It appeared, on his own account,  that  any  gay
sexual or romantic activity is conducted by him  in  an  extremely  discreet
manner and it would be reasonable to expect him to behave in  the  same  way
in Nigeria.  But Mr McVeety accepted that if I were to find the claimant is
bi-sexual and would not act discreetly upon return or would do so simply  to
avoid  persecution  or  serious  ill  treatment,  he  would  succeed   under
Article 3.  As to Article 8, deportation would separate him from his child.
 But that is what deportation does.

10.   Mr Karnik,  for  the  claimant,  pointed  out  that  there  are  some
differences between the regimes for exclusion of a grant of asylum  and  for
exclusion of a grant of humanitarian protection.  The  claimant  should  not
be excluded from either because the evidence demonstrates that  he  presents
a low risk in terms of re-offending or in terms  of  causing  serious  harm.
His more recent offence should be regarded as  being  isolated  and  out  of
character.  Further, he has shown clear remorse and there  has  been  proper
engagement with the process of rehabilitation.  All  of  the  oral  evidence
given to me had been detailed and credible.  It was understandable,  in  the
context of a claim based  upon  sexual  orientation,  that  there  had  been
delay.  In any event, that has been explained in the circumstances  of  this
case by the evidence not only of the claimant himself but  also  of  K.   He
would not be able to live openly as a bisexual person  in  Nigeria.   As  to
Article 8 of the ECHR, it would be unduly harsh to separate the family.  In
the  context  of  the  Article 8  related  Immigration  Rules   concerning
deportation his was not a "four years" offence.  It would  be  in  the  best
interests of his child for all  of  the  family  members  to  remain  living
together in the UK.





Is the claimant excluded from protection as a refugee?

11.   Article 33 of the 1951 Refugee Convention reads as follows:

      "     1.   No Contracting State shall expel or return  ('refouler')  a
      refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where
      his life or freedom would  be  threatened  on  account  of  his  race,
      religion, nationality, membership of  a  particular  social  group  or
      political opinion.

      2.    The benefit of  the  present  provision  may  not,  however,  be
      claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds  for  regarding
      as a danger to the security of the country in which  he  is,  or  who,
      having been convicted by a final judgment of  a  particularly  serious
      crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that country."

12.   Section 72 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act 2002,
relevantly provides as follows:

      "     72.  Serious criminal

                  (1)    This  section  applies  for  the  purpose  of   the
                 construction  and  application  of  Article 33(2)  of  the
                 Refugee Convention (exclusion from protection).

                 (2)   A person shall be presumed to have been convicted  by
                 a final judgment of a particularly  serious  crime  and  to
                 constitute a danger to the community of the United Kingdom
                 if he is -

                             (a)  convicted in  the  United Kingdom  of  an
                 offence, and

                             (b)  sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
                 at least two years.

                 (3)   ...

                 (4)   ...

                 (5)   ...

                 (6)   A presumption under sub-section (2), (3) or (4) that
                 a  person  constitutes  a  danger  to  the   community   is
                 rebuttable by that person."

13.   Since the claimant was convicted of an  offence  and  sentenced  to  a
period  of  imprisonment  in  excess  of  two  years,  then  the  rebuttable
presumption  that  he  is  a  danger  to  the  community  applies.   It  is,
therefore, for him to rebut that presumption.  But the  situation  here  has
been complicated by an additional factor of some potential  importance.   At
the time the appeal was before the First-tier Tribunal there was  only  the
offences of concealing criminal property and converting  criminal  property,
being linked offences,  to  be  considered.   Those  were,  of  course,  not
offences of violence though I note there is nothing in the relevant  Article
nor the relevant statute (see above) to limit the concept of danger  to  the
commission of offences of violence.   There  was  also  plenty  of  evidence
relevant to the claimant's ability, or otherwise, to rebut  the  presumption
to be found at section 72(2) of the  2002 Act.   That  included  an  OASys
report of 13 April 2016, an OASys report of 19 January 2017 and a National
Probation Service Progress Report  and  Risk  Assessment  (the  NPSPRRA)  of
19 January 2017.  But between the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
the date of the hearing before me for the purposes of  my  remaking  of  the
decision, the  claimant  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of  possessing  an
offensive  weapon  in  a  public  place.   That  offence  was  committed  on
31 March 2018 and, on 19 April 2018, the claimant appeared at the  Leeds
Magistrates Court in respect of it  and  received  a  six  months  custodial
sentence suspended for 12 months.  That offence, in  isolation,  would  not
have triggered the statutory presumption which arises  under  section 72(2)
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  But,  of  course,  as
has already been noted, that presumption had already  been  triggered.   The
fact that the later offence would not have triggered  the  presumption  does
not mean it is to be ignored.  It is, and no argument to  the  contrary  was
presented to me, relevant to the question of whether or not the claimant  is
able to rebut that presumption.

14.   I shall, first of all, evaluate  the  position  with  respect  to  the
initial  offending  which  did  trigger  the  presumption.   As   has   been
illustrated by what I  have  already  said,  the  offences  were  dishonesty
offences of some seriousness, as was  mirrored  in  the  sentencing  judge's
remarks.  But there is much in the two documents of 19 January 2017 which,
on one view, weigh in favour of the claimant with respect to  rebuttal.   In
the OASys assessment of that  date,  it  was  observed  that  there  was  no
indication that the claimant at that time "presents a risk of  serious  harm
to the general public or indeed any individual".   It  was  suggested  that,
his having by the time of the compilation of that report  been  released  in
circumstances where he did not have a regular income,  there  was  what  was
described as a  slight  risk  that  he  might  become  involved  in  similar
offending for monetary gain.  But it was said that he presented "as  a  very
positive individual", that he was "determined to make a new start  in  life"
and that he could not be assessed as posing a "risk of serious harm at  this
stage".  It was also suggested that  if  his  immigration  status  could  be
resolved in the way he would want it resolving, with  the  consequence  that
he would  be  free  to  undertake  gainful  employment,  then  any  risk  of
reoffending would be further  reduced.   The  report  also  indicated,  that
whilst in prison, he had held "a trusted mentoring  position"  with  respect
to his fellow detainees and that  he  had  received  positive  reports  from
senior staff at the institutions where he had been incarcerated as a  result
of that.  The NPSPRRA had been prepared by the  claimant's  former  offender
manager.  In summary, it was suggested therein that the claimant  had  shown
remorse and had engaged well with support services.   The  assessment  based
view was that there was a  low  risk  of  him  reoffending  and  of  causing
serious harm to others and that it was "only the absence of  a  category  of
very low" which prevented a lower assessment being made.

15.   Turning now to the more recent offending, the  claimant's  explanation
for what happened is, essentially, that unusually for him  he  had  consumed
alcohol.  He says he was pressurised by others to do  so.   He  has  limited
recall of events due to the alcohol he had consumed but his friend had  been
refused admittance to a nightclub  by  a  "bouncer"  and  this  had  led  to
matters becoming heated.  Though he could not recall doing  this,  CCTV  had
shown him running to a motorcar and obtaining an item which constituted  the
offensive weapon but he had not used it.  It was not an item  which  by  its
nature was an obvious weapon but it was an item which had the  potential  to
be used as one. He had pleaded guilty to that offence  and  another  closely
related charge had been dropped.  In a letter sent to him by  the  Solicitor
who had acted for him in connection  with  these  criminal  proceedings  and
which he has willingly disclosed, the basis of his guilty plea is  explained
as amounting to his accepting the offence but denying he  made  any  threats
after obtaining the relevant item and returning  to  the  scene.   A  letter
from a Case Manager at the West Yorkshire Community Rehabilitation Company
of 27 September 2018 indicates that he has subsequently, and seemingly more
quickly than usual, completed 150 hours of unpaid work which also formed an
aspect of his sentence.  The author of the letter says this:

      "[The claimant] has also  completed  all  10 RAR  sessions  with  his
      Case Manager and during supervision he has fully co-operated with his
      rehabilitation programme.  Initially [the claimant] was classified  as
      medium risk of harm however,  having  completed  all  aspects  of  his
      sentence requirement and taking into consideration  his  attitude  and
      behaviour during  his  supervision  with  WY CIC  Probation,  I  have
      repossessed [the claimant] in accordance with probation guidelines and
      now consider him as being low risk of  serious  harm  to  the  general
      public and has a low risk of reoffending."

16.   Of course, from the claimant's self-interest perspective,  the  timing
of all of this is quite  appalling.   Further,  the  impressive  speed  with
which he has completed his 150 hours of unpaid work may  owe  something  to
his knowledge that he was about to  appear  before  the  Upper Tribunal  in
circumstances where his offending record would be scrutinized.

17.   The material in the OASys report of 19 January 2017, as noted, places
the risk of reoffending and the risk of him causing serious  harm  as  being
low.  That sort of assessment is  also  reflected  in  the  NPSPRRA.   Those
reports seem to me to be documents it is appropriate to  accord  significant
weight to.  They have clearly been prepared by persons  experienced  in  the
field.  The reports are clear and the latter document is thorough and  well-
reasoned.  Had there not been any incidents of  further  offending  I  would
have concluded, on the basis of that material, that  the  claimant  had,  in
fact quite comfortably rebutted the presumption.  But Mr McVeety says  that
the claimant's case as to that is now fatally undermined by  his  subsequent
offending.

18.   It is worth making  the  point,  once  again,  that  the  more  recent
offending would  not,  of  itself,  have  been  sufficient  to  trigger  the
presumption which the claimant now seeks to rebut.   But  it  is  concerning
because, in the context of danger to the community, a  willingness  to  seek
out an item which is capable of being used as a weapon,  as  a  response  to
tensions arising, is hard to  ignore.   Having  heard  the  claimant's  oral
evidence I accept that he is remorseful  and  that  at  least  some  of  his
obvious regret for his actions is not linked to concern  about  the  adverse
consequences it may have regarding his  immigration  status.   The  claimant
is, by now, aged 32 years and has not, otherwise,  been  convicted  of  any
offence involving  violence  or  the  threat  of  it.   Notwithstanding  his
accepted possession of an item which constituted an offensive  weapon  there
is no suggestion that he was actually violent in possession  of  it  and  it
seems the basis of his guilty plea was that he had fetched the item but  had
not  made  threats  once  it  was  in  his   possession.   The   letter   of
27 September 2018 does contain an  opinion,  notwithstanding  all  of  the
offending, that he is currently a person who has a low risk  of  reoffending
and poses a low risk of serious harm to the general  public.   It  does  not
inevitably follow that because he has committed the crime he  has,  that  he
does constitute a danger to the community in the way in which the phrase  is
used at section 72(2) of the 2002 Act.  The view of a  number  of  persons
involved with the Probation Service, as noted above, is to the effect  that
he is at low risk of reoffending and of causing serious harm to the  public.
 In the circumstances, whilst this is finally  balanced,  I  have  concluded
that notwithstanding the recent offending which I accept is of  an  isolated
nature, the claimant does successfully,  albeit  very  narrowly,  rebut  the
presumption.

Is the claimant bisexual?

19.   Although the claimant has expressed other fears, it seems to me  that,
in reality, it is the claimant's assertion that he is bisexual  which  forms
the  cornerstone  of  any  realistic  claim  he  has  to  be   entitled   to
international protection.  The respondent, however, does not believe him.

20.   The claimant, despite having been in  the  UK  for  some  considerable
time and despite his having made a number of applications of  various  sorts
to the Secretary of State, only asserted he  is  bisexual  at  a  very  late
stage.  Indeed, he pursued an earlier claim for  asylum  without  mentioning
it.  Mr McVeety argues that if the claimant believed his life was  at  risk
he would have made his claim at an earlier stage  than  he  did.   I  accept
that, generally speaking, one would expect a claimant to seek  international
protection as soon as practicable and that this claimant did  not  do  that.
It is a matter which weighs with me but it is necessary  to  look  at  other
aspects of the evidence rather than to allow the delay,  of  itself,  to  be
determinative in this case.

21.   The claimant has claimed to have had a number of sexual  liaisons,  at
various points in his life, with males.  The most recent example is what  he
presents,  in  his  oral  and  written  evidence,  as   a   regular   sexual
relationship with P.  In describing the quality of the relationship,  it  is
fair to say that he emphasises the sexual aspect over any emotional  aspect.
 In other  words,  he  does  not  really  talk  of  his  having  a  romantic
relationship with P.  P gave evidence before me about the relationship  and
was cross-examined.  He too indicated that the attraction  between  the  two
was primarily sexual adding that there was "a little bit of affection".   It
is fair to say he was not really challenged,  in  cross-examination,  as  to
his assertions regarding his own sexuality or as to his assertions  that  he
has been having an ongoing sexual  relationship  with  the  claimant.   What
both parties have to say about the nature and history  of  the  relationship
appears consistent and no apparent inconsistencies  have  been  highlighted.
P's evidence about the relationship was in line with what he has had to  say
in his witness statement and whilst his  oral  evidence  was  brief  it  was
internally consistent.  I find that evidence to be weighty.

22.   Then there is the evidence of K.  What the claimant and K have to  say
about all of this is that, at some point  after  they  had  commenced  their
relationship but prior to their getting married, K discovered  the  claimant
looking at gay pornography.  The evidence of both of them is that, after  he
had initially sought to obfuscate, he confessed to her that he is  bisexual.
 K and the claimant both say that,  unconventional  though  this  may  seem,
they have come to an agreement whereby the claimant  is  permitted  to  have
sexual liaisons with men subject  to  conditions  regarding  his  practicing
safe sex and regarding his keeping that activity secret.  K  is,  she  says,
fearful that otherwise, her community and her family will get to know  about
the claimant's activities and their  unconventional  relationship  and  will
disapprove.

23.   K's evidence and the claimant's own evidence about all of  this  seems
to me to be strikingly consistent.  Of course,  it  is  possible  that  they
have simply concocted a story.  But I found K's evidence to be  particularly
persuasive.  She was able to articulate her  feelings,  stressing  that  she
was prepared to stand by the claimant and that,  while  she  could  not  say
what would happen in the future, she was "happy with  the  relationship  for
now".  She was clear  that  she  knew  about  his  sexuality  prior  to  the
marriage.  It is perhaps a somewhat hackneyed phrase but, to  my  mind,  her
clear and consistent evidence had the ring of truth about it.

24.   As to the delay in claiming asylum, both the claimant and K have  said
that that was due to her reluctance for there to be  any  public  disclosure
of his bisexuality.  Given that there is background  evidence  that,  within
the ethnic Nigerian community, a community to which K  belongs,  that  there
is significant disapproval of persons who do not have a conventional  sexual
orientation, I find that explanation to be plausible.

25.   In truth, having heard the evidence of P and K, both of whom  I  found
to be straightforward and frank witnesses, I am comfortably  satisfied  that
the claimant is bisexual as he  claims.   That  is  so  notwithstanding  his
previous failure to rely upon that  when  he  made  his  initial  claim  for
asylum.

How might bisexual persons be viewed in Nigeria?

26.   I have been provided with a good deal of background  country  material
concerning the way in which persons who do not have  a  conventional  sexual
orientation might be treated.  But it is not necessary for me to go  through
that material.  That is because Mr McVeety very properly conceded  that  if
the claimant is bisexual and would not be sufficiently discreet to hide  the
matter, he would be at risk upon return to Nigeria on that account, even  if
other claims he has made as to why he might be at risk in Nigeria are to  be
disbelieved.  I will simply  say  that,  having  looked  at  the  background
material which has  been  prepared  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal,  I
consider that concession to have been properly and correctly made.

If the claimant is returned to Nigeria will he, as  a  bisexual  person,  be
discreet?

27.   This brings us to a consideration of the principles  set  out  by  the
Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2010] UKSC 31.  The case involved two gay  men,  one  from
Iran and one from Cameroon, who asserted that they would be persecuted  upon
return for reasons of sexual orientation.  But a key issue  was  the  extent
to which, if at all,  they  could  be  expected  to  be  discreet  with  the
consequence that persecution or serious ill-treatment would be avoided.   At
paragraph 82 of the Court's judgment under the heading "The approach to  be
followed by tribunals" this was said:

      "     82.  When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a
      well-founded fear of persecution because he is gay, the tribunal  must
      first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence  that  he  is
      gay, or that he would be treated as gay by  potential  persecutors  in
      his country of origin.

            If  so,  the  tribunal  must  then  ask  itself  whether  it  is
      satisfied on the available evidence that gay people who  lived  openly
      would  be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  appellant's  country   of
      nationality.

            If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what  the  individual
      applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

            If the applicant would  in  fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
      exposed to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded fear
      of  persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk  by   living
      'discreetly'.

             If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  the
      applicant would in fact live discreetly and so avoid  persecution,  it
      must go on to ask itself why he would do so.

            If the tribunal concludes that the  applicant  would  choose  to
      live discreetly simply because that was how he himself would  wish  to
      live, or because of social purposes, e.g., not wanting to distress his
      parents or embarrass his  friends,  then  his  application  should  be
      rejected.  Social pressures of that kind do not amount to  persecution
      and the Convention does not offer protection  against  them.   Such  a
      person has no well-founded fear of persecution  because,  for  reasons
      that have nothing to do with  any  fear  of  persecution,  he  himself
      chooses to adopt a way of life which means he is not in fact liable to
      be persecuted because he is gay.

            If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  a  material
      reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return  would  be  a
      fear of the persecution which would follow if he were to  live  openly
      as a gay man, then, other things being equal, his  application  should
      be accepted.  Such a person has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution.
      To reject his application on  the  ground  that  he  would  avoid  the
      persecution by living discreetly would be to  defeat  the  very  right
      which the Convention exists to protect - his right to live freely  and
      openly as a gay man without fear of persecution.  By admitting him  to
      asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man without
      fear of persecution, the receiving State gives effect to that right by
      affording  the  applicant  a  surrogate  for   the   protection   from
      persecution which his country  of  nationality  should  have  afforded
      him."

28.   That is the approach which I have to  apply.   Although  the  judgment
talks of those who are gay, I see no reason to adopt  a  different  approach
with respect to those who are bisexual, so long as they  would  wish  to  be
actively so, and Mr McVeety has not sought to  persuade  me  otherwise.   I
have found that he is bisexual.  Mr McVeety accepts that  persons  who  are
male and bisexual and  would  live  openly  as  such,  would  be  liable  to
persecution in Nigeria.  So, I must now go on to consider how  the  claimant
would behave upon return.

29.   I do not believe that the claimant would, in fact, live  openly  as  a
practising bisexual person in Nigeria.  He does not assert that he would  do
that and, indeed, on the background country material  and  on  Mr McVeety's
concession, doing so would simply invite danger.  He has shown  that  he  is
prepared to be discreet, at K's urging, even in  the  United Kingdom  where
his activity does not in general terms  (though  I  note  he  has  been  the
victim of an attack which was said  to  have  a  homeophobic  cause)  invite
violence.  So, I would conclude that if  the  claimant  were  to  return  to
Nigeria he would practice his bisexuality discreetly.  The question then  is
what would motivate him to do so.

30.   It is right to say, my accepting the evidence as  to  this,  that  the
claimant has been discreet in the  UK  and  that  that  is  essentially  for
family reasons, being the insistence of K which he has  decided  to  honour.
That might be capable of suggesting that,  if  he  was  to  be  returned  to
Nigeria, he would be similarly discreet perhaps because he did not  wish  to
cause embarrassment to his own family or  other  associates  or  because  of
social pressures  of  other  sorts.   But  the  claimant's  decision  to  be
discreet, I accept, whilst in the UK  has  come  about  because  of  a  very
particular and specific pressure linked to the  fact  that,  notwithstanding
his sexual liaisons with males  including  P,  he  wishes  his  marriage  to
continue to subsist.  Linked to  that,  of  course,  is  K's  understandable
insistence that he be discreet for  the  reasons  set  out  above.   As  the
claimant himself points out, if he is to return to Nigeria that  is  likely,
in consequence of  the  geographical  separation,  to  be  the  end  of  his
marriage to K.  I accept that, in reality,  that  would  be  so.   So,  that
particular pressure, which I find has been the  pressure  which  has  caused
him to be discreet, would not be present.  It was  also  suggested,  at  one
point, that because the claimant  had  been  discreet  about  his  sexuality
whilst in prison that was an indicator that he would be so  in  Nigeria  for
reasons other than a wish to avoid persecution.  I  do  not  think,  though,
that that is a credible suggestion. It is understandable that  a  person  in
prison would wish to hide a non-conventional sexual orientation  and  it  is
plausible that the claimant had witnessed, as he  claims  to  have  done,  a
person being bullied and ill-treated in  prison  because  of  that  person's
sexual orientation becoming known.

31.   The claimant, despite the  restrictions  understandably  imposed  upon
him by K, has continued to have sexual relations  with  men.   There  is  no
reason  to  think  that,  upon  return  to  Nigeria,  he  would  behave  any
differently.  The specific pressures which cause him to be discreet  in  the
UK would not, as I have already observed, be present  in  Nigeria.   Whilst,
of course, it  is  difficult  to  predict  how  someone  will  behave  in  a
hypothetical situation, I have concluded that,  to  the  lower  standard  of
proof applicable in international protection cases, I can be satisfied  that
the claimant will be discreet but only because he will  have  to  be  so  in
order to avoid persecution.  So, following the  caselaw  set  out  above,  I
conclude that he makes out his claim to be a refugee.

The implications of what I have decided.

32.   Since I have decided that the claimant has  been  able  to  rebut  the
presumption contained within section 72(2) of the 2002 Act and since I have
concluded that he has made out his claim to be a refugee  on  the  basis  of
sexual orientation, that means his appeal succeeds on  asylum  grounds.   In
consequence of that, it is not necessary for me to consider  whether  he  is
excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection and whether, if he is  not,
he is entitled to such a grant.  It is simply not necessary  or  appropriate
to consider humanitarian protection once a claimant has succeeded on  asylum
grounds.  But, I would also make the point that had  I  concluded  that  the
claimant had failed to rebut the presumptions, his claim to be  entitled  to
international protection would still have succeeded under Article 3 of  the
ECHR  because  the  persecution  I  have  found  he  would  be  at  risk  of
experiencing would also amount to Article 3 ill-treatment.  So, in a sense,
my conclusions regarding exclusion from protection under  the  1951 Refugee
Convention does not significantly impact upon the overall outcome.

33.   Since the  claimant  has  demonstrated  entitlement  to  international
protection  that,  effectively,  constitutes  an   absolute   bar   to   his
deportation.   Futher,  since  I  have   concluded   he   is   entitled   to
international protection, there is little to be gained by  my  going  on  to
analyse the arguments concerning Article 8 of the ECHR.

34.   In remaking the decision, therefore, I allow the claimant's appeal  on
asylum grounds.  I also allow his appeal on Article 3 ECHR grounds.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already been set aside.

In remaking the decision, I allow the claimant's appeal on  asylum  grounds.
I also allow the claimant's appeal on human rights grounds under  Article 3
of the ECHR.


Signed:                Date: 12 November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted anonymity to the claimant.  I continue that
grant under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
Unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court Proceedings.

Signed:                Date: 12 November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee has been paid and no fee is payable, there can be no fee award.


Signed:                Date: 12 November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
