
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11437/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd April 2019                            |On 15 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  Mr M.Z.R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy of Counsel instructed by Arshed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13th  April  1988.   The
    Appellant had applied for asylum based on his fear that if returned  to
    Pakistan he  would  face  mistreatment  due  to  his  sexuality.   That
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 19th September 2018.
     It was noted that the Appellant had  had  a  previous  refusal  of  an
    application for a residence card based on a sham  marriage  to  an  EEA
    national back in December 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed the Notice of Refusal of September 2018 and  the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Oliver  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 26th April 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated
    on 14th November the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on  all  grounds.
    Grounds of Appeal were submitted to the Upper Tribunal on 26th November
    2018.  Permission was refused by  Immigration  Judge  Lambert  on  19th
    December 2018.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 30th January 2019, and on 28th March  2019  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kamara granted permission to appeal.  For the reasons set out  in
    the grounds, Judge Kamara considered it was arguable that the judge had
    erred in his consideration of the evidence of the three  witnesses  and
    from the decision it was not possible to tell if the  witness  evidence
    was rejected or why.  In addition, the other grounds which  related  to
    the assessment of the Appellant's credibility and errors of approach in
    considering  his  account  of  his  sexuality  were  also  held  to  be
    appealable.

 3. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Submission/Discussion

 4. Ms McCarthy briefly starts by addressing the manner in which the  judge
    has assessed the Appellant's credibility, advising that his credibility
    has been rejected in its entirety based upon his  previous  immigration
    application of a marriage to an EEA national where the judge had  found
    that that relationship had been a sham marriage.  The judge  considered
    that the Appellant's credibility was severely damaged and that just  as
    he lied about the marriage, he is now lying about his  sexuality.   She
    submits that when considering whether the EU marital relationship was a
    sham, the judge had failed to consider that there was evidence recorded
    that the Appellant's former wife had complained that the Appellant  was
    not a good partner and that he did not feel sexually attracted to  her.
    Further, she submits that the Appellant had genuinely believed  in  the
    marriage and believed himself to be the father of his wife's child  and
    that this is supported by efforts he had made regarding his  paternity.
    She submits that the judge had failed to look at all  of  the  evidence
    when making his finding.

 5. Secondly, she considers that even if the judge had been correct to find
    that the Appellant's relationship with an EU national was not a genuine
    one, it did not follow that he was necessarily lying about his  current
    sexuality.  She points out various instances, all recited at  paragraph
    13  of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal,  by  which  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account to be a gay man had been misrecorded by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and that the judge had failed to  consider  aspects
    of the Appellant's evidence and relevant evidence.

 6. Finally, she turns to the  issue  regarding  the  judge's  approach  to
    witness evidence - this being the main basis upon which Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kamara granted permission to appeal.  She  submits  that  if  the
    judge was correct to  find  that  he  could  not  rely  solely  on  the
    Appellant's own evidence as to his sexuality, then the witness evidence
    would become all the more crucial in this case and  that  there  was  a
    requirement upon the judge to consider the witness evidence  carefully.
    Three witnesses, she advises me, were  called,  one  of  whom  was  the
    Appellant's partner whom he has known since 2016.  She advises that the
    Appellant was dating his partner since 2017 and has  been  living  with
    him since mid-2017.  She submits that the judge had completely  ignored
    the evidence of two of the witnesses and had further declined  to  make
    any assessment at all of the weight to be given to the evidence of  the
    Appellant's partner.  In this she refers to  the  judge's  analysis  at
    paragraph 44.  She submits that if the judge had believed that  he  had
    been duped, then at least there was a responsibility for  him  to  give
    clear reasons and that no reasons  had  been  given  for  doubting  the
    credibility of his partner.  For all these  reasons  she  submits  that
    there are material errors of law and that the matter should be remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 7. In response, Mr Avery notes that there was a finding that the Appellant
    had  previously  been  in  a  sham  marriage  and  that   the   judge's
    consideration was perfectly proper and there was nothing  fundamentally
    wrong about what the judge has said with regard to the Appellant's  EEA
    application.  He points out that in the subsequent asylum  claim  based
    on the Appellant's sexuality he had previously failed  to  mention  his
    sexuality when making his application  for  asylum.   He  takes  me  to
    paragraphs 40 to 41 of the decision, pointing  out  the  judge  clearly
    knows what the evidence is and that he is entitled to consider all  the
    evidence as he has done in the round and that against the background of
    the Appellant's past immigration history the judge  has  found  against
    him, something that he was entitled to do.  He asked me to dismiss  the
    appeal.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. The judge has taken for his  starting  point  the  adverse  credibility
    findings made previously against the Appellant in that he had entered a
    sham marriage in support of his application for an EEA residence  card.
    That in itself is something the judge was entitled to  do.   The  judge
    had to remind himself that  a  proper  approach  to  credibility  would
    require an assessment of the evidence and of the general claim  and  in
    asylum claims relevant factors would be the internal consistency of the
    claim; the inherent plausibility of it;  and  the  consistency  of  the
    claim with external factors of the  sort  typically  found  in  country
    guidance.  I acknowledge  that  it  is  theoretically  correct  that  a
    claimant need do no more than state his  claim  but  that  claim  still
    needs to be examined for consistency and inherent plausibility  and  in
    nearly every case external information against which the claim could be
    checked will be available.  Unfortunately, in this instance  the  judge
    has failed to carry out a full and proper assessment of the Appellant's
    credibility.  He  has  drawn  the  conclusion  that  just  because  the
    Appellant had misled the court so far as his claim for his relationship
    with an EU national was concerned that he is lying  about  his  current
    sexuality.  He may well be but it is necessary for the judge  to  carry
    out an evaluation.

11. In carrying out that evaluation it is even  more  important  the  judge
    gives full and proper consideration to the  witness  evidence  that  is
    available, particularly the witness evidence of his partner who, as  Ms
    McCarthy states, has already got indefinite leave to remain status  and
    who has no reason to tell lies with regard to the relationship.

12. What unfortunately the judge has failed to do is to give an analysis of
    the witnesses' evidence and to make findings thereon.  All he has  done
    is to look at this matter completely in the round and has come up  with
    a conclusion that endorses his previous finding of adverse credibility.
     Such an approach,  particularly  the  failure  to  consider  and  make
    findings on the witness evidence, creates a material error of  law  and
    renders the decision unsafe.

13. The correct approach consequently is to remit the matter  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing with none of the  findings
    of fact to stand.  However, I do emphasise to the Appellant  that  that
    does not mean necessarily that another  judge  on  giving  a  full  and
    detailed consideration of all the evidence will  come  to  a  different
    decision to  that  of  the  previous  judge.   That  is  a  matter  for
    consideration following the evidence at the restored hearing.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contains  material  error  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are  given  hereinafter  for  the  further
hearing.

 1) That on finding that there is an error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision of Immigration Judge  Oliver  is
    set aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.


 2) The Appellant's appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting
    at Hatton Cross on the first available date 28 days hence with  an  ELH
    of three hours.


 3) None of the findings of fact are to stand.


 4) That the rehearing be before any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other
    than Immigration Judge Oliver.


 5) That there be leave to both parties to  file  and  serve  a  bundle  of
    subjective and/or objective evidence upon which they intend to rely  at
    least seven days prior to the restored hearing.


 6) That an Urdu interpreter do attend the restored hearing.


The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and none is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 15 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 15 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N
