
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/11769/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Thursday 28 January 2021                |On Thursday 18 February 2021    |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     W M
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  an  appeal
on protection grounds.  It is therefore appropriate to continue that  order.
 Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy,  Counsel  instructed  on  a  direct
access basis
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.          The Appellant appeals against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Shore promulgated on 15 January 2020 ("the  Decision").
      By the Decision, the Judge dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against
      the  Respondent's  decision  dated  31  October  2017   refusing   his
      protection and human rights claims.  The  challenge  to  the  Decision
      relates only to the appeal on protection grounds.   This is the second
      time that the appeal has reached the Upper Tribunal, an earlier appeal
      decision, also dismissing the Appellant's appeal having been set aside
      by this Tribunal on 28 January 2019 and the appeal remitted for  a  de
      novo hearing with no findings preserved.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He came to the UK  as
      a student on 4 June 2011.  He sought  to  extend  his  leave  in  that
      category in 2012 but his application was refused.  He has had no leave
      to remain since April 2013.  He claimed asylum on 31  May  2017.    He
      claims to be at risk because the Sri Lankan authorities suspect him of
      assisting the LTTE in various  ways.   It  is  accepted  that  he  was
      previously employed in the security division in Sri  Lanka  which  was
      tasked with looking after the President and his family.  The Appellant
      says that, in 2007, he facilitated meetings between a group of  Tamils
      living in Malaysia and the President's  son  at  the  request  of  his
      friend [TR].  His friend was part of a group of Tamils including a man
      named [KS].  The Tamils wished to invest in a golf  course  and  hotel
      estate in Sri Lanka.  KS introduced the Appellant to his Tamil friend,
      [J] who came from Jaffna.  The Appellant assisted J to obtain  a  visa
      from the passport office.   The Appellant says that he  resigned  from
      the army in September 2009 and that, in about  October  2010,  he  was
      abducted and detained by the CID, who accused him of working  for  the
      LTTE.  He was released on payment of a bribe and  the  Appellant  says
      that he was told to leave Sri Lanka or that he would be  killed.   The
      Appellant left Sri Lanka on his own passport.

3.          The Appellant has produced court documents including  an  arrest
      warrant which he says support his case  to  be  at  risk.   After  the
      appeal was remitted for redetermination, at a hearing  in  July  2019,
      the Respondent sought an adjournment to enable a  verification  report
      to be obtained in relation to the court  documents.   The  adjournment
      was granted.  The Judge directed the Respondent to file  and  serve  a
      verification report by 4pm on Monday 25 November 2019 (see [6] of  the
      Decision).  The verification report,  dated  1  November  2019,  ("the
      verification report") was not filed and served until 2 December  2019.
      The verification report concludes that  the  court  documents/  arrest
      warrant produced by the Appellant  are  not  genuine.   The  Appellant
      sought an adjournment  in  order  to  allow  him  to  respond  to  the
      verification report which he had seen only seven  days  prior  to  the
      hearing.  That was refused for reasons I  will  come  to  later.   The
      Judge found that the court  documents  and  arrest  warrant  were  not
      genuine and concluded that the Appellant's claim was not credible.  He
      therefore dismissed the appeal.

4.          The Appellant appeals the Decision on two grounds as follows:
            Ground one: The Judge erred by refusing to adjourn the  hearing.
       The hearing was, as a result of that failure, rendered unfair.
            Ground two: The Judge erred in  various  material  regards  when
      determining that the claim was not  credible.   That  includes  errors
      said to be made in relation to the court documents.

5.          Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Grant-Hutchison on 17 February 2020 for the following reasons:

            "...2.     It is  arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  by
           failing to adjourn the Appellant's appeal to allow the Appellant
           and his representative sufficient time to take  instructions  on
           the DVR and liaise with the Sri Lankan attorney who had attended
           the Colombo Magistrates Court and obtained a certified  copy  of
           the magistrates court documents.  It is recorded in the  grounds
           of permission that the Respondent  had  failed  to  comply  with
           directions.  She was directed to file and serve a  copy  of  the
           DVR by 4pm on 25 November 2019 which was  instead  served  on  2
           December 2019 thus  leaving  less  time  for  the  Appellant  to
           respond.  This may  have  made  a  material  difference  to  the
           outcome  or  to  the  fairness  of  the  proceedings.   (Nwaigwe
           (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) is  referred  to
           for its terms)."

            Although the Judge does not express a view on the second of  the
      grounds, it is not  suggested  that  permission  is  granted  only  on
      limited grounds and both grounds may therefore be argued.

6.          The Respondent filed a Rule 24 reply on 4 March 2020 seeking  to
      uphold the Decision.

7.          Due to the interruption  of  normal  Tribunal  business  by  the
      Covid-19 pandemic, I issued a Note and Directions on  20  March  2020,
      indicating that it might be possible for the error of law issue to  be
      determined on the papers and without a  hearing.   The  views  of  the
      parties on that proposal were sought.  No submissions  were  received.
      A second opportunity was given on 8 September 2020 for the parties  to
      make submissions, but none were received.

8.          On 27 October 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson again  reviewed
      the file and directed that,  due  to  the  lack  of  response  to  the
      proposal to determine the issue without an appeal and that this  is  a
      protection claim, it was not in the interests of justice for the issue
      to be determined without a hearing.  She therefore directed  a  remote
      hearing.  That took place before me via Skype for Business  which  was
      attended by both representatives and by the Appellant.  There were  no
      technical issues, and the parties were able to follow the hearing.   I
      had before me the documents which were before the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge.

9.          Unfortunately, due to double booking, Ms Cunha was  not  present
      at the start of the hearing and had not joined some 15  minutes  after
      the start.  The hearing therefore began without her.  She was able  to
      join  after  about  30  minutes.   I   summarised   Mr   Paramjorthy's
      submissions for her at that point and she was able to respond  to  all
      the arguments made.

10.         The matter comes before me to  determine  whether  the  Decision
      contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make  the
      decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

11.         Mr Paramjorthy did  not  pursue  all  of  the  elements  of  the
      Appellant's ground two, accepting that, if I  were  not  with  him  in
      relation to the first ground coupled with the challenge to the Judge's
      findings about the court  documents,  the  independent  challenges  to
      other of the Judge's findings could not be made out.

12.         I begin  with  the  way  in  which  the  Judge  dealt  with  the
      adjournment request.  At [6] of the Decision, he  says  the  following
      concerning the background to the verification report:

            "I heard the appeal on 16 July  2019,  when  the  Appellant  was
           represented by Mr Jafar, as  he  was  today.   Counsel  for  the
           Respondent made an  application  for  adjournment  to  enable  a
           verification report to be obtained on an arrest warrant produced
           by the Appellant.  I allowed the application as the document was
           very important to the Appellant's appeal and whether it could be
           relied upon would be of significant importance and it was in the
           interests of justice to await the report.  I directed  that  the
           case be adjourned to 9 December 2019 and reserved it to  myself,
           as I had spent some time reading into  the  documents.   I  also
           directed the Respondent to file and serve a verification  report
           by 4:00pm on Monday 25 November 2019."

13.         In relation to the verification report and the  request  for  an
      adjournment on this occasion, the Judge said this:

            "27. At 11:48 on 2 December  2019,  the  Respondent  produced  a
           document verification report (DVR) dated 1  November  2019  into
           the  court  report  submitted  by   the   Appellant   from   the
           Magistrates' Court Colombo under reference number B01284/11/8 in
           connection  with  the  Appellant's  alleged   involvement   with
           terrorist activities.  The conclusion of the DVR  was  that  the
           document submitted was not genuine.
                 ...
            29.  At the start of the hearing, I discussed the case with  the
           representatives.   Mr  Jafar  made   an   application   for   an
           adjournment to allow the Appellant to respond to  the  DVR.   He
           submitted that the Appellant  should  be  able  to  examine  the
           document in detail and that  it  had  been  served  late,  on  2
           December 2019, rather than by the  date  directed  by  me  -  25
           November 2019.  Ms  Lasoye  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had
           submitted the document which was the subject of the DVR [AB1-18-
           AB1-32]  and  a  letter  dated  25  June  2019   from   Kandappu
           Gopalasankar, an attorney  who  says  he  attended  the  Colombo
           Magistrates' Court to obtain the document.  Mr Jafar  said  that
           the relevant authority  was  the  case  of  SH  (Afghanistan)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.
            30.  I retired to consider my  decision.   I  started  from  The
           Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum
           Chamber) Rules 2014.  Rule 2 sets out the  overriding  objective
           of the Tribunal Rules, which is to enable to [sic]  Tribunal  to
           deal with cases  fairly  and  justly,  which  includes  avoiding
           delay, so far as is compatible with proper consideration of  the
           issues.  The power to adjourn or postpone a hearing is contained
           in rule 4(3)(h).  The document that was the subject of  the  DVR
           is at the centre of the Appellant's appeal.  He had obtained the
           evidence of an attorney in June 2019 as to the document  itself,
           which increased the importance of the document  in  the  appeal.
           The document had been obtained in 2017, but the  statement  from
           Mr Gopalasankar was dated a few weeks before the hearing  on  16
           July 2019.  The Respondent decided to exercise her  right  to  a
           DVR.
            31.  The DVR had been served late, but had still been  served  a
           week before the date of this hearing.  That was more than enough
           time for the Appellant's lawyers to take instructions on the DVR
           and make an application for an adjournment.  No application  was
           made until the day of the hearing.  I  did  not  find  that  the
           Appellant's right to a fair and just hearing was compromised  by
           refusing the application for adjournment  because  both  parties
           have provided their own  reports  as  to  the  veracity  of  the
           document and it is for me to determine the evidence I preferred.
            The application was refused.  I gave Mr Jafar as much  time  as
           he needed to take his client's instructions on the DVR and would
           be  flexible  in  allowing  Mr  Jafar  to  ask   the   Appellant
           supplementary questions about the DVR."

14.         In order to consider Mr Paramjorthy's arguments in  context,  it
      is also necessary for me to set out what  the  Judge  says  about  the
      Appellant's evidence and the parties' submissions in relation  to  the
      arrest warrant and  the  Judge's  findings  about  that  warrant,  the
      verification report and the other documents purporting to  verify  the
      warrant as follows:

            "53. The Appellant was then asked about the  document  that  was
           the subject of the DVR [AB1 18 - AB1  32].   He  confirmed  that
           there was a warrant for his arrest and that  the  basis  of  the
           charge was his alleged support of the LTTE.   He  was  asked  if
           that was the same reason he had been detained in 2010  and  said
           that he had been released because he had paid a bribe.   It  was
           an unofficial release.  He  was  asked  if  he  was  now  sought
           because  he  had  been  released  after  paying  a  bribe.   The
           Appellant's response was that when you  pay  a  bribe,  you  get
           released.  An official investigation is  ongoing,  so  they  are
           still looking for him.  This had been confirmed by his lawyer in
           Sri Lanka.   He had not obtained the  document  to  bolster  his
           appeal.  Everything had been obtained through  his  lawyer.   Ms
           Lasoye could contact the lawyer anytime if she wanted to.
                 ...
                 Closing Submissions - Respondent
                 ...
            67.  [The Appellant] relies on the warrant  dated  5  July  2011
           [AB1  20-  AB1  32].   The  DVR  questions  the   veracity   and
           authenticity  of  the  document.   It  is  submitted  that   the
           Appellant submitted false documents to the tribunal.  The  index
           number of the document to which the DVR relates was  in  respect
           of a report of a sudden death.  The Appellant was not  named  on
           that document, but someone else is.  That offence was  committed
           on 22 March 2011.  On the basis of the  DVR,  it  was  submitted
           that the document supplied was not genuine.
            68.  There is no open arrest warrant for the  Appellant  and  no
           risk of persecution on return.  The letter dated  25  June  2019
           from  the  attorney,  Kandappu  Gopalasankar  [SB10],  says   he
           attended the Magistrate's Court of Colombo, not the main  court.
           Little weight should be given to the evidence.   The  attorney's
           practising certificate [SB12] had not been stamped by the  court
           and contained different fonts.
                 ...
                 Closing Submissions - Appellant
                 ...
             76.   The  DVR  is  important.   In  every  citation   in   the
           Appellant's documentation (the warrant and the letter  from  his
           attorney),  there  are  nine  digits.    The   High   Commission
           representative went to the Chief Magistrates' Court, not Colombo
           Magistrates'.   The  High  Commission  representative  sees  300
           registers with either a 'B' or  'P'  reference.   There  was  no
           explanation of why there were so many.  They don't  explain  the
           date and reference span referred to.  The  official  looked  for
           six-digit  numbers,  not  nine-digit  numbers.   The  additional
           digits on the Appellant's reference were 11/8 at the end of  the
           reference number.  It was  submitted  that  asylum  demands  the
           highest standard  of  fairness.   There  was  ambiguity  in  the
           Respondent's evidence.  If  the  High  Commission  official  had
           referred to nine-digit numbers, the information in the  DVR  may
           be worth something.  They did not identify the relevance of  the
           additional three numbers on the Appellant's documents.   It  was
           submitted that I should not find the DVR to be reliable  because
           it lacks specificity and is inconsistent with the numbering  set
           out in the Appellant's documents.
            77.  The Respondent had not contacted the Appellant's  attorney.
            It was submitted that  there  was  nothing  suspicious  in  the
           Appellant's evidence.   The  extract  from  the  Sri  Lanka  Bar
           Association [SB13]  information  on  the  attorney  matches  the
           letter at SB10.  It was submitted that the  Appellant's  account
           is true.
                 ...
                 Findings of Fact and Decision
                 ...
            91.  I then turn to the arrest warrant.  I  find  that  the  way
           that the Appellant disclosed the  document  and  the  subsequent
           statement of his attorney raises suspicion about the reliability
           of both documents.  The attorney's  letter  [SB10]  raises  more
           questions than it answers.  He did not  produce  the  letter  of
           instruction dated 17 October 2017 from [KM].   He  says  he  was
           asked to look for  a  specific  case  number:  B01284/11/8,  but
           nowhere is it explained how [Mr M] knew  the  case  number.   He
           says that the arrest warrant is  dated  6  July  2011,  but  the
           document is dated 5 July 2011.  The date of the envelope that is
           said to have contained  the  document  is  dated  21  June  2017
           [SB32], which  predates  the  date  the  attorney  said  he  was
           instructed to obtain it.  Given the findings of country guidance
           cases that forgeries are easy to obtain in  Sri  Lanka  and  the
           timing of its production,  I  would  not  have  found  that  the
           Appellant could rely on either the letter or the warrant, to the
           lower standard, even if there was no DVR.
            92.  I reject Mr Jafar's submissions as to  the  reliability  of
           the DVR.  I find that the High Commission report was written  by
           someone  who  has  knowledge  of  the   system.    The   alleged
           discrepancy in the reference  number  is  no  such  thing.   The
           author of the DVR explained their methodology.  It  is  not  for
           the Respondent to prove anything.  It is for  the  Appellant  to
           show to the lower standard that the document  is  reliable.   He
           has failed to do so.  I do not accept  that  the  Appellant  has
           shown to the lower standard that the warrant is genuine or  that
           he can rely on the attorney's letter."


15.         The documents said to have been obtained  from  the  court  with
      their translation appear at [AB/18-31].  The envelope  in  which  they
      are said to have been received is at [AB/32].    The  case  number  is
      shown  as  "B01284/11/8".   The  documents  bear  the  seal   of   the
      Magistrate's Court in Colombo dated 23  October  2017.  The  documents
      consist of a report filed against the Appellant and an arrest warrant,
      the material parts of which read as follows:

             "...The  suspect  has  helped  the  LTTE   by   keeping   close
           relationship with the  LTTE  terrorist  organization,  providing
           accommodation facilities to LTTE terrorist organization members,
           helping LTTE members to leave the country  and  receiving  money
           for supporting the LTTE.  However, the suspect has escaped  from
           the custody whilst the investigations were pending.
            The CID has information that the suspect has  escaped  from  the
           country and seeking to issue an arrest  warrant  to  arrest  the
           suspect.
            ***According to the section 42 of Code of criminal Procedure Act
           No. 15 of 1979, the court issuing hereby an open warrant to  the
           Criminal Investigations Division, [K] Police Station  to  arrest
           the suspect immediately."


      The warrant is dated as signed on 6 July 2011.  I note that the report
      on the preceding pages is dated 5 July 2011.  According to the  bundle
      index, the envelope at page [32] is the one  in  which  the  documents
      arrived.  It is dated 21 June 2017.

16.          The  letter  from  Mr  Gopalasankar,  Attorney  ("the  lawyer's
      letter") dated 25 June 2019  appears  at  [10]  of  the  supplementary
      bundle.  His Bar Association card, admission certificate and directory
      entry are at pages  [11]  to  [13].   The  lawyer's  letter  reads  as
      follows:

             I  am  an  Attorney-at-law,  I  am  mainly  practicing  at  the
           Magistrate's, District and High Court of Colombo.  I have  eight
           years experience in the Criminal and Civil matters.
            On 16th October 2017, I was instructed by [Mr K M] to obtain the
           court certified copies of Case  No.  B01284/11/8  at  Magistrate
           Court of Colombo concerning Mr [WM].  Mr [WM] sent me a  fax  on
           17th October 2017 authorising me to obtain these  documents  fro
           the Magistrate Court of Colombo.
            I confirm that I attended at Magistrate Court of Colombo and met
           the registrar of Magistrate Court of  Colombo  on  18th  October
           2017 and requested a certified copy of the said file, and  after
           paying a fee of Rs. 1250.  The registrar issued these  documents
           on 23rd October 2017 and I had these translated  by  Mr  [L  W],
           Government approved translator and gave it to Mr [K M].  I  paid
           Rs. 2000 to the sworn translator for translating these documents
           from Sinhala to English.  I charged Rs. 10,000 from Mr [K M ] as
           my professional fees for obtaining these documents and Rs.  3250
           for court fees and translation.
            I confirm that I personally went through the  documents  at  the
           Magistrate Court of Colombo Case No. B01284/11/8.  The  Criminal
           Investigation Division (CID) has filed a case against the  above
           named under case No B01284/11/8.  There  is  an  arrest  warrant
           issued against the above named  by  the  Magistrate's  Court  of
           Colombo on the 06th July 2011.  The status of the arrest warrant
           is 'live' and I have had sight of the original arrest warrant.
            It is my opinion that since an open warrant has been  issued  by
           the Colombo Magistrate's Court against the above named, he  will
           be arrested at the airport on his arrival to the country.  It is
           well known that the persons charged under similar offences  face
           harsh treatment followed by the arrest.
                 I have issued this letter at the request of Mr [K M].
            If you need any further clarification regarding this  letter,  I
           can be contacted at my office by the contacts detailed  on  this
           letter."

17.         The verification report is headed as  coming  from  the  British
      High Commission in Colombo.  The date of verification is  given  as  1
      November 2019.  It was completed by the "3rd Secretary".  The  purpose
      of the report is said to be a "[s]ite visit to verify what purports to
      be a court report issued by the Magistrates' Court Colombo  under  the
      reference number B01284/11/8 in connection to  terrorist  activities."
      The supporting documents are said to be a copy  of  the  court  report
      with English translation.  The body of the verification  report  reads
      as follows:

            "On 01/11/2019, I accompanied by a locally engaged Officer  (B3)
           acting as translator, visited the Chief  Magistrates'  Court  in
           Hultsdorf, Colombo 12.
            I have attended this Court on a number of occasions and know  to
           go straight to the Police Post located at the  entrance  to  the
           compound.  Being fully compliant with  Article  22,  we  do  not
           disclose any personal details or specific reference numbers  and
           no documents were with us.  The Officer-in Charge recognised  us
           and was aware we would be seeking entry  to  the  Registry.   He
           permitted access and we were escorted by a police officer.
            There are approximately 300 registers with  either  'B'  or  'P'
           reference numbers.  There is no need to  check  each  and  every
           register.  They can be searched by locating the appropriate date
           and reference span which are regarded on the spine.  We  located
           a register for the year 2011 containing  the  reference  B01284.
           According to the records case no B01284 for 2011 relates  to  an
           investigation in to  a  sudden  death  of  an  individual.   The
           accused is named [K F] of [address].  The offence was  committed
           on 22/03/2011 and  the  accused  was  produced  at  the  Colombo
           Magistrates court on 13/05/2011."

18.         I remind myself that, when considering whether an appellant  has
      been deprived of a fair hearing, I should apply the guidance laid down
      by this Tribunal in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418
      (IAC) as follows:

            "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request, such
           decision could, in principle, be erroneous  in  law  in  several
           respects: these include a  failure  to  take  into  account  all
           material considerations; permitting immaterial considerations to
           intrude; denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to
           apply the correct test; and acting irrationally.   In  practice,
           in most cases the question will be whether the refusal  deprived
           the affected party of his right to a  fair  hearing.   Where  an
           adjournment refusal is challenged on  fairness  grounds,  it  is
           important to recognise that the question for the Upper  Tribunal
           is not whether the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be
           applied is that of fairness:  was there any deprivation of  the
           affected party's right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v
           Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department [2011]  EWCA  Civ
           1284."

            The question is not whether  Judge  Shore  acted  rationally  or
      reasonably in refusing the adjournment.  It is  for  me  to  determine
      whether the refusal of the adjournment has deprived the Appellant of a
      fair hearing.

19.         If the only question for me was whether Judge  Shore  had  acted
      reasonably or rationally, I would have no hesitation in answering that
      question  in  the  affirmative.   He  properly  directed  himself   in
      accordance with the  relevant  rules,  case  law  and  the  overriding
      objective.  He took into account the importance of  the  documents  to
      the proceedings and explained why he did not consider  an  adjournment
      to be  warranted.   On  the  basis  of  the  reasons  for  seeking  an
      adjournment given by the Appellant's Counsel on that occasion (not  Mr
      Paramjorthy) as recorded at [29] to [31] of the  Decision,  I  am  not
      surprised that the Judge came to the conclusion he did.

20.         However, I have to determine whether the  hearing  before  Judge
      Shore was fair to the Appellant when looked  at  objectively  now.   I
      therefore turn to consider that question.

21.         I begin by noting what Judge Shore says about the importance  of
      the court documents and  in  particular  the  arrest  warrant  to  the
      Appellant's case.   Those  documents  are  described  at  [6]  of  the
      Decision  as  "very  important"  and  the  reliance  on  them  as  "of
      significant importance".  As Mr Paramjorthy submitted, and  I  accept,
      they are likely to be central to the claim as,  if  the  Appellant  is
      indeed of continuing interest to the  authorities  for  his  perceived
      support for the LTTE, he may well be at risk on return.

22.         I asked Mr Paramjorthy what purpose would have  been  served  by
      an adjournment of the hearing.  After all, if the only thing that  the
      Appellant could do would be to ask the  attorney  to  comment  on  the
      verification report, it is difficult to see how any  further  evidence
      would have assisted (as Judge Shore observed).  It would be  the  word
      of an attorney instructed by a close relative of the Appellant against
      the word of a representative from the British High Commission.  It did
      not seem to me in that regard that the criticisms of the  verification
      report on behalf  of  the  Appellant  (as  recorded  at  [76]  of  the
      Decision) had any merit.  Mr Paramjorthy  agreed  that  there  was  no
      obvious discrepancy between the case number given  on  the  documents,
      the attorney's letter and the verification report.  The writer of  the
      verification report was fully aware that the case  was  said  to  have
      been issued in the Colombo Magistrate's Court.  There was no  evidence
      that I can see to show that  this  was  any  different  to  the  Chief
      Magistrate's Court but, even if it were, there is no evidence that the
      records kept by the Chief Magistrate's Court  which  follow  the  same
      numbering as the case number in the documents and attorney's letter do
      not include those of the Colombo Magistrate's Court.  Had  I  been  in
      Judge Shore's position, I too would have rejected the submissions made
      in that regard (as he did at [92] of the Decision).

23.         Mr Paramjorthy informed me however that this is not the sort  of
      evidence that he would have wanted to obtain had the opportunity  been
      given.   He said that, if he had the opportunity, he would instruct an
      expert, Dr Chris Smith whose team are familiar with  the  verification
      of Sri Lankan court documents.  He did not  seek  to  suggest  that  a
      representative of the British  High  Commission  is  not  independent;
      rather he said that access to the court documents is controlled by the
      police  and  therefore  the  representative  would  not   have   free,
      unobstructed access to the documents.   He  freely  admitted  that  no
      efforts had been made to carry out such checks since the Decision  but
      told me that this was because he is acting on a  direct  access  basis
      pro bono and the Appellant was unable to raise the funds  to  instruct
      Dr Smith.  He would only be able to do so  if  legally  aided  and  he
      would not be given legal aid unless the Decision were quashed, and the
      appeal re-heard.  The central point was, though, that there were steps
      which could be taken by the Appellant to respond to  the  verification
      report in evidence,  but  the  Appellant  had  lost  that  opportunity
      because of the very short period of time which he had to consider  the
      verification report.

 24.        Mr Paramjorthy also pointed out  to  me  that  Judge  Shore  had
      given the Respondent a period of  about  four  months  to  obtain  the
      verification report but was not willing to give the Appellant any more
      than what amounted to about four working days.  That at the very least
      could be perceived as being unfair.  He  also  pointed  out  that  the
      verification report was dated 1 November 2019, but the Respondent  had
      not produced it until about one month later.

25.         I also asked Mr Paramjorthy to explain the unfairness  in  light
      of the other evidence on which the Judge had relied when reaching  his
      conclusions about the reliability of the court documents.  He had  not
      simply relied on the verification report but had  made  criticisms  of
      the attorney's  letter  and  the  warrant  itself  (see  [91]  of  the
      Decision). The findings made at [91] and [92] are criticised in ground
      two also on the basis of the Judge's reasoning.

26.         I did not understand Mr Paramjorthy to dispute that  the  timing
      of the production of the court documents including the arrest  warrant
      and the attorney's  letter  was  something  on  which  the  Judge  was
      entitled to  rely  (as  I  have  already  observed  I  accept).    The
      documents are  said  by  the  attorney  to  have  been  given  to  the
      Appellant's relative when they were obtained in October 2017  and  yet
      the attorney's letter was not produced until nearly two  years  later.
      The court documents are dated in 2011 and yet were not obtained  until
      over six years later. There is also force to the Judge's  point  about
      how the Appellant's relative would know the case number  in  order  to
      instruct the attorney to make the search (which relates  also  to  the
      point made about the lack of production of the instructing letter).

27.         However, as Mr Paramjorthy pointed out, the  discrepancy  relied
      upon by the Judge in relation to the dates of the documents (5  versus
      6 July 2011) is not in fact a discrepancy.  The report is dated 5 July
      2011.  The warrant was issued on 6 July 2011.  Although Mr Paramjorthy
      was forced to accept that the envelope at [AB/32] is said in the index
      to be that in which the court documents were obtained, and  that  this
      is dated before the attorney is said to have obtained  the  documents,
      he submitted that in all likelihood, this was an  error  made  by  the
      previous solicitors and that it  was  more  likely  that  it  was  the
      documents which follow that envelope in the bundle which were received
      in it.

28.         For those reasons, although the  Judge  does  make  some  cogent
      points against the court documents and  attorney's  letter  and  valid
      points in favour of the verification report, his reasoning is at least
      to a minor extent undermined by  the  misunderstanding  of  the  court
      documents.

29.         Although Mr Paramjorthy did not  rely  on  ground  two  save  in
      relation to the criticisms made of [91] and [92] of  the  Decision,  I
      have carefully considered the other criticisms made. For completeness,
      I deal with those briefly below:
            Paragraphs [87] and [88]:  Finding that  the  Appellant's  claim
      has remained broadly consistent but  has  evolved  piecemeal  and  the
      claim was made late.  It is asserted that  the  Judge  has  failed  to
      indicate which documents have emerged later.  One only has to look  at
      the attorney's letter for the answer to that (and see also what I  say
      in relation to timing of the court documents).   The  Judge  was  also
      entitled to rely on the timing of the claim itself.  The weight to  be
      attached to that delay is a matter for the Judge.
      Paragraph [89]: Finding that Appellant probably was a  member  of  the
      President's security division.  It is  accepted  that  the  Judge  has
      referred to the correct test in relation to the standard of proof  for
      protection claims at [12] of the Decision but it  is  said  that  this
      finding reflects an application of the wrong standard.   There  is  no
      merit to this submission.  The Judge is here making a factual  finding
      (which is in the Appellant's favour) rather than assessing whether the
      claim as a whole is made out.
      Paragraph [89.1] to [89.11]: Adverse credibility findings.   The  only
      challenge to these findings is in relation to the  standard  of  proof
      (dealt with above), wrong burden of proof (as to  which  there  is  no
      evidence of misapplication - the grounds muddle the concepts of burden
      and standard) and fairness of hearing by  refusal  to  adjourn  (dealt
      with separately).

30.          Ms  Cunha  accepted  that  the  Respondent  had  produced   the
      verification  report  late  in  the  day.   She  did  not  offer   any
      explanation why that was so (although I accept that she  probably  did
      not have access to the Home Office file).  She pointed  out  that  the
      Appellant was legally represented before  Judge  Shore  and  that  the
      points made by Mr Paramjorthy now were ones which could have been made
      by the Appellant's previous representatives.

31.          Given  the  Judge's  findings  as   regards   the   Appellant's
      credibility more generally and that the  verification  report  was  at
      least undermining of the documentary evidence so that it could not  be
      relied on in support, Ms Cunha submitted that the failure  to  adjourn
      could make no  difference.   The  Appellant  had  been  given  a  fair
      opportunity to put his case and  had  not  been  deprived  of  a  fair
      hearing.

32.         I have carefully considered the Judge's  findings.   As  I  have
      already noted, the grounds fail to identify any error of  law  in  the
      findings save at [91] of the Decision  when  dealing  with  the  court
      documents and attorney's letter.  As Ms Cunha submitted, if  one  were
      assessing the attorney's letter and the court documents alongside  the
      verification report, it is highly likely that  any  judge  would  have
      formed the view that the court documents and attorney's  letter  could
      not be relied upon.  The verification report is persuasive evidence.

33.         That leaves only the first of the Appellant's grounds  regarding
      the fairness of the hearing.  Again, if I  had  been  conducting  this
      hearing at first instance, based on the submissions  then  made  about
      why an adjournment  was  necessary,  I  would  almost  certainly  have
      reached the same view as Judge Shore.  I am however  persuaded  by  Mr
      Paramjorthy's submissions that the refusal to adjourn has deprived the
      Appellant of a fair hearing.

34.         I do not place much weight in  that  regard  on  the  difference
      between the period which the Respondent was permitted  to  verify  the
      court documents and that which  the  Appellant  had  to  consider  the
      verification report. The Appellant was  represented  at  the  previous
      hearing when timescales had been agreed and did not apparently  object
      to the deadlines given, namely the filing of the  verification  report
      on 25 November and the hearing on 9 December.  He had therefore agreed
      to a very short period between production of the  verification  report
      and the next hearing. The verification report  was  filed  seven  days
      late but there was no evidence that this delay  had  prevented  action
      which could have been made in fourteen days but could not be  made  in
      seven.  As Judge Shore also pointed out, the Appellant's solicitors at
      the very least could have made an application to adjourn in that seven-
      day period.  The attorney in  Sri  Lanka  had  given  contact  details
      including a telephone number.  There is no reason  why  he  could  not
      have been contacted in that time if that was the  evidence  which  the
      Appellant wished to obtain. The Respondent on the other  hand  had  to
      instruct representatives in Sri  Lanka  for  the  first  time.   Those
      representatives have other formal roles to perform and  also  have  to
      interact with the court and police  system  no  doubt  via  diplomatic
      channels.

35.         However, it is now explained what the Appellant wishes to do  in
      order to have the  court  documents  checked  by  another  independent
      source.  I have  already  set  out  the  Judge's  comments  about  the
      importance, indeed the centrality  of  the  court  documents,  to  the
      Appellant's case.    If there  is  indeed  an  extant  arrest  warrant
      against him, that changes the complexion of the Appellant's  case  and
      provides strong support to his  claim  as  a  whole.     Although  the
      grounds challenging the other reasons for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
      credibility are unmeritorious, if it subsequently transpires that  the
      verification report is inaccurate and the court documents  are  indeed
      genuine, that will support the Appellant's claim.  At the very  least,
      another Judge will have to consider the appeal on the basis  that  the
      Appellant was of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities in 2010/11 for
      assisting the LTTE.

CONCLUSION

36.         For those reasons, I am satisfied that the  refusal  to  adjourn
      has deprived the  Appellant  of  a  fair  hearing.   It  is  therefore
      appropriate to set aside the Decision.  In light  of  the  significant
      importance of the court documents to the  Appellant's  case  and  that
      their reliability is central to the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
      case, it is inappropriate to preserve any of the findings made.

37.         I have carefully considered whether it is appropriate  to  remit
      the appeal or retain it in the Upper Tribunal.  That  is  particularly
      so given that this would be the second remittal.  However,  the  claim
      will need to  be  considered  completely  afresh  which  will  require
      extensive fact finding.  I have also found  that  the  previous  first
      instance  hearing  was  unfair  to  the  Appellant  and  it  would  be
      inappropriate to deprive him of one level of appeal in consequence.  I
      am therefore persuaded that it is appropriate  to  remit  the  appeal.
      Both representatives agreed.


DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore  promulgated
on 15 January 2020 is set aside.  No findings are preserved. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-hearing  before  a  Judge  other
than Judge Shore and Judge Aujla (who determined the  appeal  on  the  first
occasion).


Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 5 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
