
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11565/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2019                  |On 15 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    [A G]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E S King, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou dismissing his appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 18 September 2018 to refuse  to  grant
    him asylum and humanitarian protection in the UK.

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan,  born  on  [~]  1985.   He
    arrived in the UK on 3 March 2002 with a student visa  valid  until  15
    May 2013.  He first claimed  asylum  on  5  September  2016  which  was
    refused on  5  March  2017.   His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed by FtTJ Greasley on 25  April  2017.   His  applications  for
    permission to appeal to the First-tier  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    refused on 8 September 2017 and 30  November  2017,  respectively.   He
    then lodged further submissions on 20 July 2018, the rejection of which
    is the subject of this appeal.

3.   The appellant's asylum claim was based on  his  sexuality.   The  judge
    was provided with a respondent's bundle of documents which he listed at
    paragraph 7 of his decision.  At paragraph 8, the  judge  said  he  was
    provided with a substantial  bundle  of  documents  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, including witness statements  from  the  appellant  and  two
    witnesses and a psychiatric report by Dr. Shortt dated 24 October  2018
    and a country expert report on Afghanistan.

4.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant  and  four  witnesses.
    The judge's findings of fact and credibility are set out at  paragraphs
    30 to 48.

5.   I heard submissions from the parties as to whether the judge  erred  in
    law in his decision.

6.   Ms King relied on the renewed grounds of appeal upon  which  permission
    was granted.  She submitted that there were two bases  in  the  grounds
    but they are interlinked.  The first was whether  the  judge  correctly
    applied the Devaseelan guidelines; and the second was that  looking  at
    the evidence did the judge make adequate findings?  She said  that  the
    two grounds are interlinked because the appellant had been  disbelieved
    by Judge Greasley that he was gay and the evidence produced to  support
    his claim postdated that first decision.

7.   Ms King said that the  instant  appeal  is  a  fresh  claim,  with  new
    evidence considered by the Secretary of State with a right  of  appeal.
    The judge noted at paragraph 30 the  original  determination  by  Judge
    Greasley and at paragraph 32 stated that all  the  additional  evidence
    provided by the appellant postdated his original hearing.

8.   Ms King submitted that the four witnesses attended court on  behalf  of
    the appellant to confirm  that  he  had  attended  various  gay  clubs,
    attended counselling on a weekly basis for nine months, and had contact
    with other support groups and had spoken about his sexuality.  All this
    evidence had to be treated with  anxious  scrutiny  and  could  not  be
    dismissed solely on the credibility findings  in  an  earlier  hearing.
    She submitted that the evidence needed  to  be  probed  to  reveal  the
    weight and conclusions that could be  drawn  from  it,  but  cannot  be
    properly  dismissed  on  Devaseelan  principles  solely  due   to   its
    production after the first hearing.

9.   Ms King referred the court to paragraph 33 where the  judge  considered
    the letter from Patrick Clements Genitourinary Medicine Centre dated 18
    July 2018 which stated that the  appellant  had  attended  on  multiple
    occasions since 2012.  The judge stated that there were no  reports  of
    treatment prior to January 2018.  The judge was more concerned  at  the
    discrepancy in dates between that letter and that of  31  January  2017
    from the same centre.  Ms  King  submitted  that  there  was  a  slight
    discrepancy but argued that the judge took from it  that  the  evidence
    postdated the previous hearing.

10.  I find that the medical evidence from Dr Shortt and  from  the  Patrick
    Clements Genitourinary Medicine Centre  was  new  evidence  which  fell
    under both the second and fifth of the Devaseelan principles as it  was
    evidence  emanating  from  an  independent  source  that  it  was   not
    necessarily tainted by the adverse credibility  findings  made  against
    the appellant.   In accordance  with  the  Devaseelan  principles  this
    should have been a reason for the judge to  consider  it  with  anxious
    scrutiny and not to summarily  dismiss  it  because  it  postdated  the
    previous judge's decision.

11.  I turn to consider the second ground relied on by  Ms  King  which  was
    that the judge failed to give adequate consideration to  the  evidence,
    in particular, the evidence of the witnesses.  Ms King said  [NN]  gave
    oral evidence.  The other three witnesses were tendered  for  evidence.
    They simply adopted their witness  statements.   There  was  no  cross-
    examination of these witnesses by the HOPO.

12.  Ms King said [NN] said in evidence that  she  had  one-to-one  sessions
    with the appellant on  a  fortnightly  basis  and  also  had  telephone
    contact with him for about nine months.  The judge noted that there was
    no cross-examination of her  by  the  HOPO.   Ms  King  said  Ms  [N]'s
    evidence goes to the core and corroborates the appellant's  claim.   It
    is  from  an  independent  source  which  the  judge  had  to  consider
    carefully.  However, the only analysis of  Ms  [N]'s  evidence  was  at
    paragraph 31 where the judge stated that the  appellant  had  submitted
    supporting evidence from UK Lesbian & Gay Immigration Group  confirming
    his attendance at both  these  organisations  with  representatives  of
    both, attending the hearing and giving evidence that they  believed  he
    is homosexual.

13.  Ms King said there was evidence from [AK] and [EG]  who  are  connected
    to Micro Rainbow International.  In their evidence they  described  the
    appellant's experiences of being gay and had no reason to doubt how the
    appellant had spoken out about  being  gay.   Ms  King  said  the  only
    analysis of their evidence was at paragraph 32  where  the  judge  said
    that both witnesses had given evidence that he  had  started  attending
    Serpentine Galleries since October 2017, that  is  after  his  original
    appeal and prior to his further representations.

14.  Ms King said that Mr Amandeep had also give evidence  that  he  attends
    gay clubs with the appellant.  The  judge  said  this  contradicted  Mr
    Proctor's evidence that the appellant did not  attend  gay  clubs.   Ms
    King said it was open to the judge to query the weight to attach to  Mr
    Proctor's letter but his evidence did not completely and  intrinsically
    undermine the evidence of Mr Singh who was in court to confirm that the
    appellant went to gay clubs.

15.  Ms King said that at paragraph 35 the judge dismissed the  evidence  of
    Dr Shortt because  he  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  and
    further, that Dr Shortt made  no  conclusions  as  to  the  appellant's
    sexuality.

16.  Ms Cunha submitted that Judge Onoufriou had to take  into  account  the
    findings made by Judge Greasley in not accepting that the appellant was
    gay and the new evidence.  She submitted that  Dr  Shortt  came  to  no
    conclusion as to the appellant's sexuality, yet again.  The judge noted
    that the appellant's new partner Mr Proctor was not in court  and  that
    his evidence was inconsistent with Mr Singh's evidence.  There  was  no
    evidence why Mr Proctor did not attend the hearing.

17.  Having heard the submissions, I found that the judge erred in  law  for
    the reasons outlined by Ms King.

18.  I find that the judge gave inadequate consideration to the evidence  of
    the  witnesses,  in  particular  the  evidence  of  [NN]  who  was   an
    independent witness.

19.  I also find that the fact that Dr  Shortt's  report  did  not  conclude
    that the appellant was gay was not  a  sufficient  reason  to  fail  to
    consider the report properly.  The purpose of the report was  to  carry
    out a  psychiatric  assessment  of  the  appellant  based  on  all  the
    information provided by the appellant.

20.  I find that the judge's constant reference to the  evidence  postdating
    the first determination was an indication that the judge did not  apply
    anxious scrutiny to all the evidence that was before him.

21.  I find that the judge's decision discloses material errors of law  such
    that his decision cannot stand.

22.  The appellant's appeal is remitted for rehearing at Hatton Cross  by  a
    First-tier Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Onoufriou.

23.  An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 13 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

