
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11200/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                             |                                   |
|On 20 March 2019                   |On 22 March 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                  HENRI [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes instructed by Ashwood Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in  respect  of  this
    Appellant. I consider it unnecessary to make an order.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hudson promulgated on 28 November 2018, which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 26 May 1985 and is a national of Cameroon.

 4. On 16 March 2018 the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that  he
    was gay and would be at risk on return to Cameroon.

 5. On 6 September 2018 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Hudson  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge (i) failed to take
    into account material factors;(ii) adopted plausibility as a  criterion
    to determine how individuals ought to have acted and  (iii)  failed  to
    apply Upper Tribunal guidance on the treatment of witness evidence.

 8. On 8 January 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy gave permission to
    appeal on all grounds and on the additional basis that having  accepted
    that the Appellant had joined LGBTQ groups and therefore the Judge  was
    required to consider whether he might be perceived to be gay on  return
    because of such activity.





Discussion

 9. Mr Bates conceded that the errors raised in the grounds were  made  out
    and both parties agreed that the decision should  be  remitted  to  the
    First Tier for a complete re hearing.

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those submissions and read  the  decision  I  reached  the
    conclusion that Mr Bates was correct to concede that the errors of  law
    raised in the grounds were made out and were material errors of law.

11. This was a claim based on risk on return as a gay man in Cameroon.  Any
    assessment of such  a  risk  must  examine,  inter  alia,  whether  the
    Appellants conduct was such that he might be received as a gay  man  in
    accordance with the guidance given in HJ Iran.  The  Appellant's  claim
    that he was involved in an organisation called CAMFAIDS was accepted by
    the Judge at paragraph 22 but the Judge did not accept that this  would
    result in him being perceived to be gay. The Judge failed  in  reaching
    that conclusion to engage with the material at page 54  of  the  bundle
    which recorded that the leadership of CAMFAIDS had  been  summoned  for
    the 'promotion of homosexual practices.' I also note that  in  granting
    permission  Judge  McCarthy  observed  that  having   recognised   that
    'perception' was part of the assessment and having  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had attended Manchester Gay Pride and joined  various  LGBTQI
    organisations he was at risk of being perceived to be gay. These errors
    I consider to  be  material  since  had  the  Tribunal  conducted  this
    exercise the outcome could have been different. That in my view is  the
    correct test to apply.

12. In relation to the second ground  that  he  Judge  adopted  a  test  of
    plausibility in relation to the behaviour of gay men and  their  sexual
    relationships and general behaviour  Mr  Bates  conceded  that  he  was
    uncomfortable with some of the findings made by the Judge. He  accepted
    that it was not open to  the  Judge  to  make  an  adverse  credibility
    finding on the basis  that  the  male  (Samuel)  propositioned  by  the
    Appellant (paragraph 19) did not immediately respond to  his  advances.
    Having found that such relationships were risky in Cameroon she  allows
    for only to responses- an immediate yes or no and fails  to  allow  for
    the possibility that he may have wanted  to  consider  whether  he  was
    prepared to take the risk of engaging in such a relationship.

13. Ground 3 also argued that the Judges approach to the  evidence  of  the
    witness Mr Jones was flawed relying on the guidance found in R (on  the
    application of NK) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00431 (IAC). The Judge gave no weight to the fact that  the
    facilitator of an LGBTQI group and Church  elder  who  is  himself  gay
    accepted the Appellant was gay based on his  behaviour  and  engagement
    with the  LGBTQI  males  as  she  found  that  his  own  sexuality  was
    irrelevant. The Upper Tribunal case accepted that this was  in  fact  a
    matter the Judge could take into account: 'it was not just  a  decision
    made on what the applicant had told  them  but  because  of  their  own
    experiences and their own sexuality'

14. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety. All matters to be redetermined afresh.

15. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
         the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity  for
         that party's case to be put to and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to the  approach  to  the
    evidence. In this case none of the findings of fact are  to  stand  and
    the matter will be a complete re hearing.

17. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.



Signed                                                              Date
20.3.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


