
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11785/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th October 2018                    |On 19th October 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy (instructed by A & P Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant who had sought asylum in the United Kingdom on the basis that
    he would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka due to his  links  with  the
    LTTE.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal set out the detail of the Appellant's claim and
    noted that there was a medical  report  dealing  with  the  Appellant's
    scarring. The Judge concluded, based on that report, that at some point
    prior to April 2017 the Appellant had received beatings which  had  led
    to injuries. It was not possible to say, based on the scarring, whether
    these happened during the 2009-2013 period of claimed  torture  or  the
    2016 period.

 3. The Judge noted that before the Tribunal was the  determination,  dated
    2nd February 2016 dealing with  the  Appellant's  brother's  claim  for
    asylum. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that he had been a member  of
    LTTE, his account was accepted by the Judge  but  the  Judge  concluded
    that that, even taken together with his  attendance  at  a  Heroes  Day
    celebration in  the  UK,  would  not  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities. However, he was at risk on return because he  had  escaped
    detention in 2013 and accordingly his release was illegitimate  and  he
    would not be recorded as being of no further interest on return.

 4. The Judge noted that there was no mention in the brother's evidence  of
    the current Appellant and his claimed  problems  and  found  it  highly
    implausible that, if the present Appellant  had  been  detained  as  he
    claimed and fled to India, this would not have been  mentioned  by  his
    brother, particularly as he relied on the family's LTTE connections.

 5. In terms of this Appellant the Judge found he had been inconsistent and
    vague in  his  account  regarding  the  time  he  spent  in  India  and
    subsequent travel to Hungary and claim for asylum there.

 6. The Judge found the Appellant had made no attempt to  claim  asylum  in
    Hungary because he wanted to come to the UK for economic  reasons.  The
    Judge found him not credible in his evidence about his arrest  when  he
    returned to Sri Lanka from Hungary in 2016.

 7. The Judge also found the Appellant had been dishonest in parts  of  his
    evidence where he had claimed not  to  have  discussed  his  claim  for
    asylum with his brother Whereas in contrast his brother  said  that  he
    had explained his own case to the  Appellant  and  had  given  him  the
    determination to read.

 8. At paragraph 89  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was reasonably likely to have been a member of  the  LTTE  at
    some period during the war in Sri Lanka before 2009. The Judge  did  so
    based on the Appellant's  family  background,  as  established  by  his
    brother's determination. That evidence, combined with the  findings  of
    the medical report indicating that he had sustained  injuries  at  some
    point, led the Judge to conclude that it was reasonably likely that for
    a period the Appellant had fought with the LTTE and sustained  beatings
    and that it was reasonably likely that those were at the hands  of  the
    authorities.

 9. It was found in the brother's case, that his membership  of  the  LTTE,
    being arrested  subsequently  in  Sri  Lanka  and  having  family  LTTE
    affiliations was not sufficient to secure asylum. The  Judge  concluded
    that this Appellant therefore, having been  aware  of  that  sought  to
    contrive an account of interest in him by the authorities  which  post-
    dated the end of the war. The Judge concluded at paragraph 93 that  the
    Appellant was an economic migrant to the UK  who  arrived  here  having
    been unsuccessful in establishing himself economically in either  India
    or Hungary. She did not find it reasonably likely that he had  suffered
    a long period of detention and release.

10. Having so found the Judge then went  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    activities in the UK since his arrival. She noted that  in  his  asylum
    interview, conducted on 12th October 2017, he indicated he had attended
    only two events in the UK, was not working for the LTTE in the  UK  and
    was involved with no Tamil organisations or groups. He did  not  attend
    meetings in the UK. He had attended a  Martyrs'  Day  Commemoration  in
    November 2017 but the Judge found this to be an attempt to bolster  his
    asylum claim. The Judge noted he had produced a letter  from  the  TGTE
    dated 11th December 2017 which simply said that he is an activist.  The
    letter however contained no details of any role carried out by him  and
    contained much generic information about the aims of TGTE which had  no
    direct relevance to the Appellant. The Judge attached little weight  to
    that document and dismissed the appeal.

The Error of Law

11. The grounds upon which permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted asserted that the Judge had erred  in  failing  to  consider  a
    document from the ICPPG which indicated that the  Appellant  had  given
    evidence under oath to be submitted to the UN.  It  was  also  asserted
    that in assessing the extent of the Appellant's activities  in  the  UK
    and whether they would put him at  risk  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in failing to have regard to evidence before, her  including  his
    Tamil Eelam ID card issued by the TGTE and  the  photographic  evidence
    submitted when assessing the extent of his activities in the UK and how
    these would be perceived. It is asserted  that  this  was  particularly
    relevant as the TGTE is a proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka.

12. The matter first came before me in May 2018  when  I  was  tasked  with
    deciding whether the First-tier Tribunal had made an error of  law  and
    if so whether and to what extent the Decision and Reasons should be set
    aside.

13. I did not find the Judge's failure to consider the letter from ICPPG to
    be a material error because the letter did not support the  Appellant's
    case. It did not indicate that he had given a  statement  that  had  in
    fact been submitted to the UN.

14. I did however find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  the
    assessment of risk to the Appellant as result of his membership of  and
    activities with TGTE in the UK and in particular in failing to consider
    that TGTE is a proscribed organisation and whether his  membership  and
    activities for that organisation, taken together with his links to  the
    LTTE would put him at risk on return.

15. I  preserved  the  remaining  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and adjourned the matter to a resumed hearing to consider that
    single issue, namely whether his membership of and activities with  the
    TGTE in the UK, taken together with his former links to the LTTE, would
    put him at risk on return.  I directed the Appellant's  representatives
    to file and serve a complete bundle of all  the  evidence  relied  upon
    dealing with that issue by 10th July 2018.

16. The matter next came before me on 17th July 2018  when  Mr  Paramjorthy
    confessed to not having notified his instructing solicitors as to  what
    occurred on the  last  occasion  and  the  need  to  collate  and  file
    evidence. That failure was compounded by the Tribunal having listed the
    matter, not as a resumed hearing but as an  initial  hearing  thus  not
    raising alarm bells with  the  representatives.  The  matter  was  thus
    adjourned by consent to 14th August 2018.

17. On 14th August 2018 the matter had to be adjourned once  again  because
    the bundle had not been served in accordance  with  directions  and  in
    fact was only received by  the  Home  Office  on  the  morning  of  the
    hearing. Additionally, there was a suggestion the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    about to hear a  country  guidance  case  dealing  with  the  TGTE  and
    enquiries needed to be made with regard to that.

18. The matter finally came before me for a resumed hearing on 15th October
    2018. By that time, I had established that, although the is  a  country
    guidance case in the system, it is unlikely to be heard  for  at  least
    nine months. On that basis both representatives agreed  that  I  should
    proceed to deal with the case.

The New Evidence

19. As mentioned above the Appellant had filed a  supplementary  bundle  of
    evidence concerning his TGTE activities in the UK.

20. The evidence included a letter dated 17th July 2018 from the Office  of
    the Prime Minister of  the  Transnational  Government  of  Tamil  Eelam
    (TGTE). That letter indicates that it is the TGTE's policy to  validate
    volunteer activists' involvement with the TGTE only if that involvement
    is for periods longer than three months.

21. The letter also indicates that it is TGTE policy not to  authorise  any
    elected members, Ministers of Cabinet or Deputy  Ministers  to  provide
    oral testimony in courts or Tribunal's. They do not believe  that  such
    persons are qualified to provide an expert opinion on the nature of the
    risks to be faced by activists upon return to Sri Lanka.

22. There is a further letter from the from the Member  of  Parliament  (UK
    section) TGTE dated 15th July 2018 referring  to  the  Appellant.  That
    letter confirms that he has been working as an activist for TGTE  since
    September 2017. It states that he was one of the victims of war  crimes
    in Sri Lanka and joined as a  volunteer  in  the  TGTE  in  support  of
    creating a free Tamil Eelam in Sri Lanka. It states that the  Appellant
    has attended many meetings and many events  and  public  demonstrations
    organised by TGTE. It states that he is part  of  the  media  team.  It
    lists the following events that have been  organised  by  the  TGTE  to
    which he has contributed his time, namely Mullivaical  Remembrance  Day
    as cycling coordinator, participating in the Great  Plastic  Pickup  by
    TGTE, protesting in front of Downing Street organised by TGTE,  Harvest
    Festival and Sports, a Women's Day Rally and Human Rights Day.

23. It goes on to say that he  contributes  to  the  campaign  against  the
    ongoing genocide in Sri Lanka  and  that  he  expresses  his  political
    aspirations publicly. It also confirms that  most  of  the  photographs
    that are taken at public events organised by the TGTE are published  in
    the media such as websites, Sri Lankan newspapers and television.

24. There is then a copy of  the  TGTE's  Pongal  Festival  brochure  which
    contains the Appellant's name as part of the organising team. There are
    then letters from Andrew Selous  MP,  addressed  to  the  Appellant  in
    response to points raised by the Appellant regarding  human  rights  in
    Sri Lanka and enclosing the response of the Minister of State for  Asia
    and the Pacific. That response indicates the U.K.'s support of  the  UN
    Human Rights Council which is working with Sri Lanka to  improve  human
    rights and also indicates that the United Kingdom has made a  long-term
    commitment to improving human rights in Sri Lanka and is  dedicated  to
    supporting the rebuilding of the country after three decades  of  civil
    conflict and sets out steps that have been taken. What that letter does
    not indicate is particular concerns over ongoing human  rights  abuses;
    rather it indicates that matters are improving.

25. There is then a copy of the Appellant's TGTE card indicating that he is
    a member of the TGTE Ministry of Sports and Community Health section.

26. There are then a number of  photographs  showing  the  Appellant  at  a
    number of events. The first is it a Pongal Day festival  celebrated  on
    20th January 2018, one at a protest against  Sri  Lanka's  Independence
    Day in front of 10 Downing Street on 4th February 2018,  another  at  a
    protest demanding that the  British  government  should  arrest  a  war
    criminal, organised by the TGTE  on  9th  February  2018.  There  is  a
    photograph of the Appellant  at  International  Women's  Day  rally  in
    Trafalgar Square, London in March 2018 wearing a high  visibility  vest
    indicating membership of TGTE. There are photographs of a demonstration
    in support of the release of Tamil prisoners of  war  in  front  of  10
    Downing Street  on  1st  April  2018.  There  are  photographs  of  the
    Appellant attending a cycle rally. There is a photograph of a  TGTE  MP
    with the Appellant presenting Andrew Selous MP with a petition  to  the
    Foreign & Commonwealth Office. There is a photograph of  the  Appellant
    at Black Tiger Day at the TGTE office on 8th July 2018 and  at  various
    other events including the launch of TGTE's TV on 22nd July 2018.

Submissions

27. Mr Melvin  submitted  that  the  identity  card  shown  in  the  bundle
    indicated that the Appellant was involved only  with  the  Ministry  of
    Sports Community Health, not related to political activities but rather
    involved only in the organisation of sporting events.  He  has  been  a
    member only for the last 12 months. Although the Appellant  claims  his
    family have been threatened on account of his diaspora activities, that
    evidence was found to be not credible in the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He
    submitted there was little  evidence  of  any  key  role  in  TGTE,  no
    evidence of fundraising or any suggestion of separatist activities.  Mr
    Melvin submitted there was no family  history  of  LTTE  links  and  no
    evidence of past persecution for the Appellant. He submitted there  was
    no evidence of media activities or any suggestion  that  the  Appellant
    had addressed any of the rallies.  He argued the Appellant  had  simply
    used those occasions as photo opportunities in  order  to  bolster  his
    asylum claim.  He also pointed out there was no attendance by anyone at
    the hearing from TGTE who could support the Appellant's role.

28. He submitted, given what is known about the sophisticated  surveillance
    techniques operated by the Sri Lankan government, they would  be  aware
    of the Appellant's role  which  was  non-political.  He  submitted  the
    letters from the  TGTE  gave  little  evidence  about  the  Appellant's
    activities and the  demonstrations  that  he  has  attended  relate  to
    historic matters concerning Tamils in Sri Lanka  rather  than  diaspora
    separatist activities.

29. He submitted that the Appellant is nothing more than a low-level member
    of the TGTE and the photographs do not put him in a risk category.

30.  Mr  Paramjorthy,  acknowledging  that  there  are  not  many  positive
    credibility findings in the first Tribunal's Decision and Reasons,  did
    point out that the Judge had found it reasonably likely  the  Appellant
    had been a member of the LTTE and fought during the war. He argued that
    if the Appellant had formerly  been  an  LTTE  member  he  was  clearly
    committed to a separate Tamil state  and  pointed  to  the  Appellant's
    attendance at various TGTE events in the UK.

31. With regard to the Appellant's ID card that Mr Melvin had referred  to,
    he pointed to the other ID card,  contained  in  the  original  bundle,
    which was the full TGTE membership card clearly  indicating  commitment
    to a separate Tamil state. The sports card is additional to that.

32. He submitted that the decision to be made is what would happen  to  the
    Appellant at the airport on return. It is the case that there is family
    affiliation to the LTTE; his brother has refugee status on  that  basis
    and the Appellant himself has been found to have been a member  in  the
    past. The evidence before the Upper Tribunal in GJ  and  Others  (post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  indicates
    that Appellants are questioned upon return about what  they  have  been
    doing in the United Kingdom. The Appellant cannot be  expected  to  lie
    and  so  would  have  to  reveal  his  membership   of   a   proscribed
    organisation. The Appellant in this case has family  affiliations  with
    the LTTE in terms of one brother being a recognised refugee and his own
    membership and added to that  he  is  a  member  of  TGTE  which  is  a
    proscribed organisation.

33. The country guidance case does not assist as  to  the  likely  fate  of
    members of TGTE in Sri Lanka.

34. At this point Mr Melvin referred to the fact that, notwithstanding  the
    family history with the LTTE  ,  the  Appellant  had  returned  without
    difficulties in 2016.

My Findings

35. As to the  latter  point  made  by  Mr  Melvin,  the  Appellant's  TGTE
    activities arose only in late 2017; after his return to Sri  Lanka.  It
    is true that the Appellant has clearly organised and attended  a  great
    many events that have nothing to do with separatist activities and  are
    sporting or social events.  However, that is  not  the  whole  picture.
    The photograph of his handing a petition to an MP is clearly political.
     Further he stands out from others attending events by wearing  a  blue
    vest with the TGTE logo, suggesting he has an official role and is  not
    simply an attendee.

36. The two ID cards show him to be a full member of the TGTE.

37. My findings, based on the evidence  in  the  original  bundle  and  the
    supplementary bundle and the submissions of  both  representatives  are
    that the Appellant has indeed involved himself with  the  TGTE  for  no
    reason other than to add weight to what is otherwise a hopeless  asylum
    claim. However, it is now trite law that a person's motivation for  sur
    place activity does not detract from the  risk  that  those  activities
    might cause for an Appellant on return.  The  Appellant's  former  LTTE
    membership, and his family connections to the LTTE would not place  him
    at risk on return.  However,  when  those  matters  are  added  to  his
    activities, and very public activities, with  the  TGTE,  a  proscribed
    organisation, I am unable to be satisfied that he would  be  safe  from
    persecution on return. I bear in mind the  low  standard  of  proof  in
    protection cases and if I am unable to find that he would  be  safe  on
    return as a member of a proscribed organisation as  well  as  a  former
    LTTE fighter then it follows that it is reasonably likely that he would
    be at risk of persecution on return. The  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  is
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed on protection grounds

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed [pic]                            Date 16th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
