
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11605/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st February 2019                   |On 18th March 2019                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   m m A h
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Laura Gardener (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Howells (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judges
    Roblin and Lever (sitting as a panel) at Newport on 1st November  2018.
    The determination was  promulgated  on  19th  November  2018.   In  the
    decision, the Appellant's  appeal  was  refused,  following  which  the
    Appellant applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, and was born  on  1st  July
    1998.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  28th
    March 2018 refusing his application for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he claims that he will  be
    put in prison or killed if he  is  returned  to  Iran  because  he  was
    working as a kolbary (porter)  and  was  caught  smuggling  across  the
    border to Iraq alcohol and if put in prison as a Kurdish  man  he  will
    not be released (see paragraph 6).  He claimed that he smuggled alcohol
    because he needed money for his mother's eye operation.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not find the Appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness  and
    rejected his evidence.  The judge found that the Appellant was unlikely
    to transport goods that  were  legal  in  their  nature.   Despite  the
    Appellant's emphasis of smuggling of alcohol, the judge  said  that  "I
    find no great risk to the Appellant in  smuggling  alcohol  than  there
    would be for other goods" (see paragraph 32(1)).  The judge  also  held
    that the Appellant was unable to provide  explanation  as  to  how  the
    soldiers were present and was unable to provide any obvious  answer  or
    cogent reason when he claimed that he had been ambushed (see  paragraph
    32(2)).  It was further held that the Appellant  produced  no  evidence
    that the authorities knew his name or that they possess any information
    or details relating to him (see paragraph 32(3)).  Finally, that if the
    Appellant had been a genuine refugee he would have crossed  the  border
    in Iraq where Kurds live, and where  there  was  stability  and  stayed
    there with his uncle.  He also stayed in Greece for  a  period  of  two
    weeks and did not claim asylum.

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 21st February 2019, there was  a  consensus
    between Mr Howells, appearing as Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer
    on  behalf  of  the   Secretary   of   State,   and   the   Appellant's
    representative, Ms Gardener, that the judge  below  had  erred  in  the
    panel decision dated 19th November  2018.   The  judge  had  failed  to
    conduct a holistic assessment having regard to the  country  background
    evidence which did confirm that the smuggling of alcohol  does  attract
    serious  punishment.   There  was  also  a  greater  risk  to  somebody
    smuggling alcohol than other goods.  A person caught smuggling  alcohol
    risked  imprisonment.   It  can  lead  to  executions  in   secret   or
    extrajudicially.  Second, that the  Appellant  had  provided  extensive
    country evidence on smuggling in Iran which confirmed the  presence  of
    border guards and daily risks to the kolbary, such that  it  was  plain
    that smugglers  do  routinely  escape  gunfire,  and  yet  the  judge's
    conclusion  (at  paragraph  31(2))  wrongly  appear  to  reject   this.
    Finally, the conclusion that the Appellant as a genuine  refugee  would
    have sought asylum in neighbouring Iraq or Greece was contrary to  long
    established authority that there is no requirement upon  a  refugee  to
    claim asylum in the first country in which they reach.

 7. Ms Gardener, stated  that,  given  that  this  matter  should  properly
    speaking be returned back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  determined
    by another judge, the only request she had was that there should  be  a
    Kurdish Sorani interpreter provided for the hearing.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  The decision shall be set aside.  This appeal is remitted back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  by  a  judge  other  than
    Judges C E Roblin and Lever, pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b).

 9. This appeal is allowed.

10. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2019







