
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/11663/2019 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2020                           |On 13 January 2021            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     GS

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Not legally represented

For the Respondent: Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is an Iraqi national of  Kurdish  ethnicity  emanating
   from the IKR, with date of birth  given  as  1.2.83,  has  appealed  with
   permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal promulgated  22.4.20,  dismissing  on  all  grounds  his  appeal
   against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 14.11.19, to refuse
   his claim for international protection.

2. Although at his request an interpreter in  Kurdish  Sorani  was  provided
   for the Upper Tribunal appeal hearing, there was no  (remote)  attendance
   by or on behalf of the appellant. I am satisfied that he was  sent  email
   notification of the hearing date on 10.11.20  to  the  email  address  he
   provided, as recorded below. In the premises, I was satisfied that it was
   consistent with the Tribunal's overriding objectives to deal  with  cases
   fairly and justly to proceed with the appeal hearing.

3. In summary, the grounds submit (i) that the refusal  of  the  appellant's
   adjournment request  was  procedurally  unfair;  and  (ii)  that  it  was
   procedurally unfair that he was unable to respond to the case against him
   because he had no legal representation.

4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 29.6.20. However, when the application  was  renewed  to  the
   Upper Tribunal, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blundell  granted  permission  on
   11.8.20, considering that "where no reasons were given for  refusing  the
   adjournment request, the only proper course is  to  grant  permission  on
   that point."

5. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

6. In his somewhat rambling grounds, the appellant  explained  that  at  the
   outset of the First-tier Tribunal appeal  hearing  he  mentioned  to  the
   judge "that I might have a legal representative to help me  preparing  my
   case to the tribunal if I can get the hearing adjourned so they can  have
   more theme to prepare the case." The application was refused.

7. It appears from [28] of the impugned decision  that  in  the  appellant's
   closing submissions he made a further application for adjournment,  which
   was also refused.  No reasons are recorded in  the  decision  itself  for
   either the request for an adjournment or its refusal.

8. The relevant history is as follows:

     i. the appellant arrived in the UK on 24.6.19 and claimed  asylum  the
        following day.

    ii. However, he had been in Greece for some 45 days, leaving before his
        asylum claim was determined.

   iii. The respondent's refusal decision was made on 14.11.19.

    iv.  On  28.11.19  Broudie,  Jackson  Canter  Solicitors   lodged   the
        appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  that  document,
        the appellant's address was given as 232 Car Bank Street, Atherton.

     v. On 29.11.19 the appellant and his then legal  representatives  were
        notified in writing that there would be  a  pre-hearing  review  on
        7.1.20 with  the  substantive  appeal  hearing  to  take  place  on
        21.1.20. The notice was  accompanied  with  a  Reply  Notice  which
        should have been returned to the Tribunal by 3.1.20. The notice  of
        the pre-hearing review was sent to the  appellant  at  the  address
        provided for him in Atherton.

    vi. On 4.12.19, Broudie Jackson Canter Solicitors advised the  Tribunal
        that they no longer represented the appellant.

   vii. The notice of the pre-hearing review was returned to the First-tier
        Tribunal on 11.12.19 with the envelope marked by Royal Mail as  'no
        such address'.

  viii. At the pre-trial review on 7.1.20 it was noted that no Reply Notice
        had been received.

    ix. Following the pre-trial review, directions were issued  on  9.1.20,
        confirming the substantive hearing date of 21.1.20, and including a
        requirement for the appellant to notify the Tribunal of his current
        residential address, provide an indexed and paginated  bundle,  and
        translated copies of documents he had  submitted  as  part  of  his
        claim.

     x. The First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing took place as scheduled,  on
        21.1.20 and the appellant attended in person.

    xi. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  was
        sent to the appellant by post on 22.4.20.

   xii. On 22.4.20, the Tribunal  wrote  to  the  appellant  following  his
        telephone call advising  that  the  house  number  of  232  is  not
        correct. He was advised to provide his correct address in writing.

  xiii. In response, he emailed on 28.4.20 to state that the correct  house
        number is 223. The  Tribunal's  case  file  was  amended  with  the
        correct address. The email he used was goranlawyer07@gmail.com.

   xiv. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appeal  was
        then sent to him at the corrected address on 29.4.20.

    xv. On 6.5.20 the appellant  made  an  application  for  permission  to
        appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   He   did   so   without   legal
        representation.

   xvi. On 9.7.20 the appellant was notified by email to the address he had
        provided that the First-tier Tribunal had refused  his  application
        for permission to appeal.

  xvii. On 3.8.20 the appellant lodged an out of time  application  to  the
        Upper Tribunal for permission  to  appeal,  stating  that  he  only
        received the notice of refusal on  25.7.20. He  made  this  further
        application without legal representation.

 xviii. In granting permission to appeal on 11.8.20, the Upper Tribunal did
        not address the fact that the renewed application was made  out  of
        time.

9.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies  has  provided  a  typed  Record  of
   Proceedings of the hearing on 21.1.20. This records that at the outset of
   the hearing the appellant stated that he was not ready to proceed because
   he was not legally represented.  The  record  indicates  that  the  judge
   considered  that  the  appellant  had  had  ample  time   to   obtain   a
   representative and, therefore, refused the application. The  record  also
   confirms that at the end of his submissions the appellant stated "I  need
   more time to present my case." The application was again refused.

10. In normal circumstances, if the appellant had  any  difficulties  either
   in preparing his case or in obtaining  legal  representation,  he  should
   have made that clear in  his  Reply  Notice,  which  contains  a  section
   headed, 'More time needed to  prepare  for  full  hearing.'  However,  it
   appears he did not received that notice, sent to an apparently  incorrect
   address provided in the Notice and Grounds of Appeal lodged by  his  then
   legal representatives. The notice was returned undelivered.

11. However, I am satisfied that the appellant must  have  known  from  some
   time in December 2019, if not from late November, of the scheduled appeal
   date of 21.1.20. His attendance in person at the appeal hearing  confirms
   that knowledge. It must also be the case  that  he  was  aware  by  early
   December 2019 that he had parted ways with the legal representatives  who
   submitted  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal  decision  on
   28.11.19. He does not suggest that they did not inform him of the hearing
   date following receipt  of  the  Tribunal's  correspondence  of  29.11.19
   advising of  the  pre-hearing  review  and  the  date  for  the  schedule
   substantive appeal.

12. Despite appealing on the grounds that he was not ready  for  the  appeal
   hearing because he was without legal  representation,  I  note  that  the
   appellant was able to make application for permission to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal and to  renew  that  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
   following the refusal by the First-tier Tribunal,  drafting  himself  his
   grounds. He was able to do that without legal representation and  I  also
   note that he continues to be unrepresented.

13. I am satisfied, as was  Judge  Davies,  that  the  appellant  had  ample
   opportunity to obtain legal representation and present his  case.  He  is
   himself a lawyer by profession and describes himself in practice in  Iraq
   as efficient and with a good reputation. Given that  he  did  have  legal
   representation  until  early  December  2019,  it  must  follow  that  he
   understood how to obtain legal representation.  His  application  for  an
   adjournment did not provide any reasons why he then felt he needed  legal
   representation. Neither was it been explained why he was not prepared for
   the hearing of  which  he  had  several  weeks  notice.  His  adjournment
   application was in general terms and without specificity as  to  reasons.
   Neither  did  he  explain  why  he  did  not  obtain  replacement   legal
   representation after  parting  ways  with  Broudie  Jackson  Canter.  The
   grounds as drafted continue to fail to answer  these  obvious  questions.
   The fact that he continues to pursue his case before the  Upper  Tribunal
   without legal representation suggests that he had no real intention to be
   legally represented at the First-tier Tribunal. This Tribunal  is  driven
   to the conclusion that the grounds of appeal are without merit.

14. As noted above, the appellant did not  attend  the  appeal  hearing  and
   failed to respond to the notice of hearing sent by email and the  joining
   instructions for the Skype remote hearing sent to the same email  address
   on 10.11.20. The prolonging of the appeal process may simply be  a  time-
   wasting exercise in an effort to  prevent  removal.  However,  I  do  not
   dismiss the appeal on that ground and disregard it  for  the  purpose  of
   determining whether there was an error  of  law  in  the  making  of  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I  can  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       18 December 2020



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       18 December 2020

