
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11183/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th May 2019                             |On 20th May 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    O H O
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood, Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
    avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  O H O is granted
    anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No report of these proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both
    to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
    court.


 2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
    Judge Rowlands promulgated on 20th December 2018.  The FtT Judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent
    dated 6th September 2018, to refuse his claim for international
    protection.


 3. The appellant is a national of Iraq. The background to the appellant's
    claim for international protection and the evidence heard by the FtT is
    set out at paragraphs [3] to 13] of the decision.  The findings and
    conclusions of the FtT Judge are set out at paragraphs [28] to [40] of
    the decision. At paragraph [29] of the decision, the FtT Judge note
    that the appellant did not present as a witness of truth. The Judge
    found that the basis of his claim lacked credibility and the detail
    given by him was wholly unsubstantiated. The Judge states; "As I have
    already stated, the onus of proving his claim lies with the appellant
    and he has not provided any evidence to corroborate what he says
    happened.".  In the paragraphs that follow, the FtT Judge sets out his
    reasons for the adverse credibility finding.


 4. At paragraph [30], the FtT Judge refers to the appellant's claim that
    he was an HGV Driver in Iraq and had his own vehicle. The Judge notes
    that the appellant "was unable to provide any evidence of this.".  At
    paragraph [31], the Judge states as follows:


         "He says that his brother and his wife were in an unhappy marriage
         mainly because his brother wanted a family and his wife was not
         getting pregnant. He says that he agreed to having sex with her, in
         order to get her pregnant, so that the beatings would stop and she
         would avoid being divorced. In essence he says that rather than
         leave her to be divorced, he suggested they commit adultery
         instead. This makes no sense whatsoever. The brother's unhappiness
         at being childless (sic), would pale into insignificance compared
         to his anger at discovering her infidelity. The liaison led to the
         birth of her son [R]. Despite claiming that the boy is his son, he
         does not know his date of birth. He claims to have memory problems
         but has not been able to provide any medical evidence of this, and
         it is notable that he could be very accurate about certain dates
         like the one on which he left and last spoke to his cousin, and yet
         he couldn't tell us the date of birth of his own son. I do not find
         credible that he wouldn't know even his month and year of birth,
         let alone the actual date. In fact, the boy has been born in
         wedlock and must be considered legitimate by everybody. The
         appellant says that his brother had a fertility test in Dubai but
         doesn't give any logical explanation as to why he would do that,
         particularly as he had a two-year-old, or younger than, son. He
         admitted that his brother didn't know that he had fathered the
         child and suggested that he still didn't know, there is no apparent
         reason why he needed to leave. According to him his brother
         suggested that he might help him kill his wife because of her
         infidelity. He never suggested that he thought that he was the
         father. The appellant says that he had sufficient money to take
         them out of the country so it is not clear as to why he didn't just
         send them out of the country for their own safety.


 5. The Judge provides further reasons in the paragraphs that follow.  At
    [32], the Judge refers to the appellant having given different
    explanations as to what happened during the journey between Iraq and
    the United Kingdom. The Judge refers to the appellant having told an
    immigration officer that one of the fears he had, was for his family
    still in France. At [33], the Judge refers to a factual issue that
    leads him to conclude that this claim is false.  The appellant claims
    that the child is two years old, and that his relationship with his
    sister-in-law started two years ago. The Judge notes that it is clearly
    impossible for the relationship to have begun two years ago, and for
    there to be a two-year-old child of that relationship.


 6. The Judge concludes at [34], as follows:


         "I am satisfied on the basis of all the evidence that I have heard
         that the appellant has not told the truth and that there is really
         no basis for his claiming asylum. I am satisfied that he is more
         likely than not an economic migrant."


The appeal before me


 7. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal. First, the FtT Judge
    erred in concluding that the appellant's credibility is harmed by a
    lack of corroborative evidence. The FtT Judge should have considered
    the evidence in the round and applied the lower standard of proof
    applicable in such an appeal.  Second, in reaching the conclusion that
    the appellant provided no logical explanation as to why his brother had
    taken a fertility test in Dubai, the FtT Judge failed to consider the
    matters set out at paragraphs 4 and 5 of the appellant's witness
    statement.  Third, the FtT Judge erred in relying upon the claim in the
    respondent's decision, that the appellant had told an Immigration
    Officer that one of the fears he had was for his family still in
    France.  He had never made such a claim.


 8. Mr Wood submits that there is in law, no requirement for the appellant
    to provide evidence to corroborate a claim for international
    protection. Although he accepts that a Judge is entitled to consider
    why evidence such as medical evidence that should be readily available,
    has not been provided, it was unreasonable to expect the appellant to
    provide evidence of his previous work in Iraq as an HGV driver.  It is
    quite possible that such evidence would have been lost along the way to
    the UK.  Mr Wood accepts that it was not claimed by the appellant that
    any supporting documents had been lost along the way.


 9. I reject the first ground of appeal.  I accept that as a general
    proposition, an appellant is not under any obligation to provide
    corroboration of any part of an account, but here the central part of
    the appellant's account is not supported by any other evidence.  It is
    not an error of law, when assessing an appellant's credibility, to take
    into account the absence of supporting corroborative evidence if (a)
    the availability of such evidence could reasonably be expected and (b),
    no credible account for the absence of such corroborative evidence has
    been given by the appellant.  This was explained by the Upper Tribunal
    in ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119:


         "The fact that corroboration is not required does not mean that an
         Adjudicator is required to leave out of account the absence of
         documentary evidence which might reasonably be expected. An appeal
         must be determined on the basis of the evidence produced but the
         weight to be attached to oral evidence may be affected by a failure
         to produce other evidence in support. The Adjudicator was entitled
         to comment that it would not have been difficult for the Appellant
         to provide a death certificate concerning his brother or some
         evidence to support his contention that he had received hospital
         treatment. These were issues of fact for the Adjudicator to assess.
         When the Adjudicator says in paragraph 35 that there is no evidence
         to support his assertions, it is clear, and both representatives
         accept, that the Adjudicator is referring to evidence which
         supports or corroborates the oral evidence of the Appellant."


10. Furthermore, in TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 the Court of Appeal
    stated


         "Where evidence to support an account given by a party is or should
         be readily available, a Judge is, in my view, plainly entitled to
         take into account the failure to provide that evidence and any
         explanations for that failure"


11. As Mr Bates submits, the applicant claimed that he was an HGV driver in
    Iraq and had his own vehicle.  His work in Iraq was relevant to the
    question of whether the appellant was, as he was claiming, at risk upon
    return, or, as the Judge concluded in the end, an economic migrant.
    The claim that he was an HGV driver with his own transport was made on
    the basis that the appellant had no other reason, other that the claim
    being advanced, to leave Iraq.


12. The appellant was aware from the respondent's decision that the
    respondent claimed that the appellant had provided an inconsistent and
    unclear account regarding the sexual relationship that he claimed to
    have had with his brother's wife, and the subsequent problems that he
    claims to have faced.  The Judge was assessing the claim made by the
    appellant, against the possibility of the events relied upon by the
    appellant not having occurred and the appellant simply being an
    economic migrant.  In reaching his decision, the FtT Judge was in my
    judgement entitled to take into account the lack of any evidence
    supporting the appellant's claim to have been an HGV driver in Iraq.
    That was not however determinative of the claim or the appeal.


13. In any event, the appellant also claimed that the problems with his
    memory, were the cause of his inability to provide the date of birth of
    his son.  The FtT Judge was entitled to note the absence of any medical
    evidence to support the claim that the appellant has 'memory problems'.
     As Mr Woods properly accepts, medical evidence might reasonably be
    expected to support such a claim, and would not be difficult to obtain.
     In my judgement, if the appellant was going to maintain that he could
    not provide even the month or year of birth of his son, let alone the
    full date of birth, because of 'memory problems', evidence to
    corroborate that claim could reasonably be expected from the appellant,
    who had by the time of his appeal been the UK for some 16 months, and
    had had ample opportunity to obtain such evidence.


14. The second and third grounds of appeal relied upon by the appellant
    concern the FtT Judge's consideration of the evidence.  I reject the
    claim that in reaching the conclusion that the appellant provided no
    logical explanation as to why his brother had taken a fertility test in
    Dubai, the FtT Judge failed to consider the matters set out at
    paragraphs 4 and 5 of the appellant's witness statement.  Mr Wood
    submits that when paragraphs 4 and 5 of the appellant's witness
    statement are read together, it is clear that a logical explanation had
    been provided by the appellant as to why his brother had a fertility
    test in Dubai. The appellant claimed in his witness statement that his
    brother ".. was happy when she had a child but already the problems
    were going to begin again because he wanted another child. My brother
    worked in Dubai in 2017 and it is here that he sought medical answers.
    He was told that he could not have children categorically and he was
    furious with [his wife.]".  The explanation appears therefore to be
    that the appellant's brother wanted to have more children and was
    seeking medical answers. He had been told categorically that he could
    not have children and he was therefore furious with his wife.  That
    however appears to miss the point being made by the FtT Judge.  The FtT
    Judge was concerned that there was no logical explanation as to why the
    appellant's brother would undergo a fertility test in Dubai, in 2017,
    when even on the appellant's account his brother must have known that
    it has taken his wife and number of years to conceive, and in July
    2017, the child that he believed at that point to be his own, would
    only been about a year old.


15. I accept that there is some force to the submission made by Mr Wood
    that the FtT Judge erroneously relied, at [32], upon the claim in the
    respondent's decision that the appellant had told an immigration
    officer that one of the fears he had, was for his family still in
    France, when in fact, there is nothing in the interview records to
    suggest that the appellant had made such a claim.  The appellant had,
    in his witness statement, claimed that he did not say that his [sister-
    in-law] and his son were in France.  I have carefully considered
    whether that erroneous reliance upon the claim in the respondent's
    decision letter, is material to the outcome of the appeal.


16. At paragraph [28] of the decision, the FtT Judge states that he has
    considered all of the evidence.  At paragraphs [30] to [33] of the
    decision, the FtT judge identifies a number of factors, including the
    factual issue identified at paragraph [33], that taken together, lead
    the judge to conclude that on the basis of all the evidence, the
    appellant has not told the truth and that there is really no basis for
    his claiming asylum.


17. The Judge had the opportunity of hearing the appellant give evidence
    and having that evidence tested.  The weight that he attached to the
    evidence was a matter for him.  The obligation on a Tribunal Judge is
    to give reasons in sufficient detail to show the principles on which
    the Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.
    Such reasons need not be elaborate, and do not need to address every
    argument or every factor which weighed in the decision.  It is
    sufficient that the critical reasons to the decision, are recorded.


18. I am satisfied that having carefully considered the appellant's
    evidence that it was open to the Judge to reach the conclusion that the
    account advanced by the appellant is a fabrication, and that he is more
    likely than not, an economic migrant.  The Judge refers to a number of
    matters that in the end, lead to the adverse credibility finding.  The
    erroneous reference, at [32], to what the respondent claimed had been
    said by the appellant to an immigration officer, is immaterial.  Given
    all of the other reasons identified by the Judge for the adverse
    credibility finding, that error could not affect the outcome of the
    appeal.  The Judge has set out, with a number of reasons, how and why
    he arrived at the decision that the appellant is not at risk upon
    return to Iraq.  In my judgment, a careful reading of the decision of
    the FtT establishes that the FtT Judge reached his overall findings by
    reference to a combination of factors including a lack of detail or
    sufficient explanation, inconsistencies, and matters that appeared to
    the Judge, to be implausible. The decision of the Judge is not based
    simply upon the lack of corroborative evidence, but from a
    consideration of all the evidence in the round.


19. Having carefully considered the decision of the FtT Judge, I am
    entirely satisfied that it was open to the Judge to dismiss the
    appellant's appeal for the reasons set out in the decision.


20. It follows that in my judgment, there is no material error of law in
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and the decision shall stand.


21. I dismiss the appeal before me.


Notice of Decision


22. The decision of the FtT Judge did not involve the making of an error of
    law.


23. The appeal is dismissed.


24. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          16th May 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal but in any event, as no fee  is  payable,  there
can be no fee award.


Signed                                                16th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
