
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/11455/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |          Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 August 2019                    |          On 13 September 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                     K W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Jones, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  Appellant,  a  national  of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed  against   the
    Respondent's decision made on 12 September 2018 to refuse asylum.   Her
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge M P W Harris  9the  Judge)
    who dismissed that appeal on 21 May 2019.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chohan  on
    4 June 2019.  The Respondent made a Rule 24 response on 10 July 2019.
3.     The Appellant's position in the United Kingdom had started out  as  a
    student, but she applied in 2015 for asylum and that matter went to  an
    appeal and was dealt with by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  in  a
    decision promulgated on 11 November 2016 wherein he rejected the asylum
    and Humanitarian Protection claims. So far as I am aware  that  adverse
    decision was not  the  subject  of  an  appeal  and  it  was  therefore
    evidently a starting point in terms of the further consideration  given
    to this matter by Judge Harris.

4.   One of the criticisms  particularly  made  by  Judge  Hussain  was  the
    documentation relied upon and the extent to which  it  truly  supported
    the claim.  That Judge rejected  the  reliability  of  the  Appellant's
    claim and the matter, when  it  proceeded  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Harris, a significant quantity  of  documentation  was  produced;
    particularly a transcript of court proceedings in Sri Lanka was  partly
    translated. The Judge  correctly  did  not  consider  the  untranslated
    documentation, not least one suspects because of the Tribunal Procedure
    Rules.

5.    In the event the grounds challenging the Judge's decision  essentially
    argued that points taken against that additional documentation had  not
    been raised at the hearing by the Respondent, who was not  represented,
    nor to Miss Anzani who then appeared for the Appellant.  The  Appellant
    had also in the hearing raised through her statement many points  about
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  and  iterated  her
    fears on return.

6.   Whilst noting as the Judge did that the Appellant gave evidence,  there
    was scant analysis of it in the context of it being  a  'response'  the
    response to First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain's decision, but  also  in
    terms of the centrepiece of her claim. The Judge set out the  essential
    bases of the claim, but he took the view that the documentary  evidence
    was not sufficiently significant and raised a number  of  doubts  about
    aspects of it.

7.   Ultimately the adverse conclusions that he reached,  or  interpretation
    he put on various documentation including that said to  come  from  the
    Appellant's lawyers in Sri Lanka, were essentially a  matter  for  him,
    but the issue raised was really one of fairness and whether or not  had
    those matters been put it would have been appropriate and  possible  to
    respond to them either at the hearing or if need be, as a result of the
    doubts raised, by communication with the Sri Lankan lawyers.

8.   I conclude, whilst I have considerable reservations about  whether  the
    outcome of the appeal will be different, that  nevertheless  there  are
    aspects of the criticisms of  the  documentation  and  the  Sri  Lankan
    lawyers' letters which seem  to  me  to  warrant  further  comment  and
    submissions.    I   therefore   conclude,   with    some    reluctance,
    notwithstanding the views formed by the Judge, that a fair  hearing  of
    the appeal did not occur.  I note the Respondent's position that  quite
    simply the reliability of documentation provided by the  Appellant  had
    previously been found wanting, and this could  be  seen  as  a  further
    example of an inadequacy of evidence even now derived by the Appellant.
     There was some force in that argument and  Miss  Jones  has  correctly
    made the point that simply the volume of  documentation  did  not  mean
    that it was reliable, but on the other hand, on the translations that I
    have seen that were before the Respondent, it seemed to me that some of
    the criticisms may not be warranted, but a fresh mind needs to  be  put
    to the matter.

9.   The parties submit that the matter should be  returned  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be remade.  It seems to  me  if  the  Judge  had  made
    specific and clear adverse findings against this Appellant and had  put
    the points to the representative at the hearing, there would be  little
    purpose in having it remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,  I
    conclude on balance that the fair, just and  proper  disposal  of  this
    matter requires it to be remade, although as I say I have no confidence
    that necessarily a different decision will be arrived at.

NOTICE OF DECISION

10.  I find therefore there was a material error  of  law  in  the  way  the
    Judge dealt with the additional  evidence  provided,  be  it  fresh  or
    otherwise, in the context of the earlier  decision  of  Judge  Hussain.
    Accordingly, I find the Original Tribunal decision cannot stand and the
    matter will be returned to the First-tier Tribunal.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                               Date 11 September 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey








