

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11916/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 August 2021                              |On 12 August 2021             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     HAA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Rutherford instructed by Halliday Reeves.
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. On  1  October  2020  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  ('the  Judge')
   dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.
2. The Judge records the  appellant's  representative  confirming  that  the
   Conventional reason was Membership of a Particular Social Group (MPG), as
   the appellant feared being the  victim  of  an  honour  crime,  and  that
   article 8 ECHR was not being argued.
3. Having had the benefit of considering not only the  documentary  evidence
   but also seeing and hearing oral evidence being given  by  the  appellant
   and his  wife  the  Judge  sets  out  his  core  findings  regarding  the
   credibility of the claim between [7]  and  [13]  of  the  decision  under
   challenge in the following terms:


   7.    Despite the appellant's fear of his wife's family, he remained  in
         Iraq between 2009 and 2016, which is a period of  seven  years.  Mr
         Aigbokie submitted that although the  appellant  claimed  that  his
         wife's family were powerful and  influential  and  yet,  they  were
         unable to locate him in the  seven  year  period.  Miss  Rutherford
         pointed out that the appellant and his wife had been able  to  live
         in remote parts of Iraq. In her skeleton argument, Miss  Rutherford
         makes  the  point  that  the  appellant  and  his  family  had  the
         protection of a Mukhtar where he lived. However, when one considers
         the  appellant's  witness  statement,  dated  27  March  2020,   at
         paragraph 1, the Appellant simply states that the  Mukhtar  advised
         him and his wife to keep a  low  profile.  It  is  not  clear  what
         protections the Mukhtar provided.


   8.    It is the appellant's claim that between 2009  and  2014,  he  was
         with his uncle. Between 2014 and 2016, the appellant claims that he
         was in a camp for refugees. The appellant goes on to claim that his
         wife's family had been  seen  in  certain  parts  of  Iraq  by  his
         relatives between 2010 and 2013. It is striking to note after  2013
         it seems they were not seen and nothing happened to  the  appellant
         and his wife. Indeed, nothing happened to  the  appellant  and  his
         wife between 2009 in 2016.


   9.    During his oral evidence, the appellant stated that he  left  Iraq
         because of his fear of his wife's family, and of ISIS. However,  in
         his witness statement, the appellant states that he only feared the
         ongoing war with ISIS and the general security situation. He  makes
         no mention of any fear of his wife's family as a reason for leaving
         Iraq.


   10.   The appellant relies on a document from the PUK dated  16  October
         2014.  The said document emphasises that  the  appellant  must  not
         return to Iraq. However, in 2014, the appellant was still  in  Iraq
         and, as such, it is not clear why this  document  states  as  such.
         This certainly undermines the appellant's  credibility  and  I  can
         place no reliance on this document. There is then a letter from  an
         alderman, dated 18 January 2020, which states  that  the  appellant
         left the neighbourhood and had not returned. This letter,  per  se,
         does not advance  the  appellant's  case  in  any  material  sense,
         particularly in light of my adverse findings above. In  any  event,
         the letter lacks detail and no dates have been given as to when the
         appellant left.


   11.   Mr Aigbokie questioned the appellant on how he  had  financed  his
         travel to the United Kingdom. The appellant gave  evidence  to  the
         effect that he had a house next to his father's home, which he  had
         sold.  However,  according  to  his  wife's  oral  testimony,   the
         appellant did not own any property in Iraq and that the journey  to
         the United Kingdom had been paid for by her father-in-law.


   12.   I find it quite incredible that for a period of  seven  years  the
         appellant managed to remain in Iraq and even start a family.  Three
         children were born in Iraq and  one  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
         appellant's wife is now  expecting  1/5  child.  According  to  the
         appellant's and his wife's evidence, the children born in Iraq were
         registered  and,  as  such,  I  find  it  incredible  that  if  the
         appellant's claim had substance then why his wife's family were not
         able to trace them over  a  period  of  seven  years.  That  is  an
         important point because during his  oral  evidence.  The  appellant
         stated that his wife's family as powerful and could  easily  locate
         them; which they failed to do when they were in Iraq.


   13.   Considering the facts and evidence as  a  whole  and  my  findings
         above, I can only conclude that  the  appellant's  account  has  no
         substance and is not credible. I do find  that  no  family  or  any
         individual has had any adverse interest in the  appellant  and  his
         wife,  when  they  were  in  Iraq.  Irrespective  of   my   adverse
         credibility findings, I must consider risk on return to Iraq.


4. The Judge refers to the applicable country guidance case  of  SMO  before
   writing at [15]:


   15.   It is the appellant's case that he and his  wife  do  not  have  a
         CSID: identity documents were left behind  in  Iraq.  There  is  no
         evidence to suggest that the appellant ever  approached  the  Iraqi
         consulate in the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, I see no reason  why
         the appellant could not be returned to the Kurdish region, where he
         has family to support him. Indeed, during  his  oral  evidence  the
         appellant stated that he last spoke to his father 20 days prior  to
         this hearing. I must agree with Mr Aigbokie that as  the  appellant
         managed to obtain documents from Iraq in support of this appeal,  I
         see no reason why identity documents could not be arranged for  him
         and his wife by his family in Iraq. In  short,  the  appellant  has
         nothing to fear  on return to Iraq.


5. The appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal,  which  was  initially
   refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, sitting as a judge of the  First-
   tier Tribunal, but which was granted on a renewed application by  another
   judge of the Upper Tribunal on the grounds it was  said  to  be  arguable
   that the assessment of redocumentation is inadequate and,  that  although
   there was less merit in the other grounds, permission was granted on  all
   grounds.


Error of law


     6. The appellant asserts the Judge in stating it was  not  clear  what
        support the local Mukhtar had given to  the  appellant  other  than
        telling him to keep a low profile is incorrect as the appellant  in
        his witness statement of 27th March 2020 claims  that  the  Mukhtar
        allowed  them  to  live  in  the  area  without  disclosing   their
        information, without officially registering their presence,  making
        the act of locating them much harder.
     7. It is also argued that the Judge's finding the  appellant  made  no
        mention of leaving Iraq because  of  his  wife's  problems  in  his
        witness statement was not correct as it was clear in his  statement
        that he was relying on a fear of his wife's family.
     8. The Grounds also assert the finding by the Judge  that  the  letter
        from the alderman is lacking in detail is wrong as the letter gives
        adequate detail.
     9. The Judge's finding that the children were registered  in  Iraq  is
        also said to be  incorrect  as  the  appellant's  evidence  in  his
        written statement was that they were not registered  due  to  their
        ages at the time.
    10. The Judge was clearly aware of the appellant's claim which  is  set
        out in summary form at [2] of the decision under challenge  in  the
        following terms:


        2.   The appellant's  claim  can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The
             appellant met his current wife, ZS, in January 2009.  On  four
             occasions the appellant and his family requested her  hand  in
             marriage. However,  the  appellant's  wife's  family  refused.
             Nevertheless, the appellant went on to marry  his  wife  in  a
             religious ceremony in September  2009.  The  appellant's  wife
             became pregnant and he was advised not to return home  because
             of the risk posed by the wife's  family.  The  appellant  then
             went to his uncle's home. The appellant claims that his wife's
             father and brothers had been looking for him and his wife.  It
             is claimed that women who leave their family home are  killed.
             The appellant stayed  in  Iraq  between  2009  and  2016.  The
             appellant and his wife were encountered in the United  Kingdom
             on 23 December 2016 and on the same day the appellant  claimed
             asylum. The appellant now fears returning to Iraq  because  he
             believes he and his wife would be killed by her family, and in
             particular her father and brothers.


    11. It is important the decision is  read  as  a  whole.  Although  the
        grounds challenge some of the findings made by the Judge it is  not
        made out the Judge's overall conclusion that the appellant had  not
        established that the account had any substance or credibility is  a
        finding outside the range of those available to the  Judge.  Whilst
        the appellant may have made certain claims in the witness statement
        relied upon in support of the claimed error of law, the Judge found
        that no weight could be placed upon the appellant's claim and  that
        they  lack  credibility.  The  Judges  assessment  of  the  written
        material and weight that could be placed upon that material  was  a
        matter for the Judge.
    12. The Grounds fail to establish material legal error in  the  Judge's
        conclusion that this was a fabricated claim of no  substance  which
        is not credible. This Judge's finding that no family or  any  other
        individual had any adverse interest in the appellant or his wife in
        Iraq is a finding within the range of those available to the  Judge
        on the evidence.
    13. In relation to ability to return the Grounds of challenge state:


        At [15] the judge finds that the A family can  arrange  replacement
        identity documents for them.  However,  this  is  contrary  to  the
        country guidance in SMO, which states that an applicant must attend
        their local CSA office in person now in order to obtain a new  INID
        card. This cannot be done by proxy or a family member. In addition,
        the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  Iraq:   International
        relocation, civil documentation  and  returns  June  2020  [2.6.16]
        confirms that replacement CSID can no longer be issued at an  Iraqi
        consulate. Therefore, in the absence of a CSID on return the  A  is
        likely  to  face  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  ECHR  whilst
        travelling as SMO found "11. The CSID is being replaced with a  new
        biometric Iraq National Identity Card -  the  INID.  As  a  general
        matter, it is necessary for an individual to have one of these  two
        documents  in  order  to  live  and  travel  within  Iraq   without
        encountering treatment or conditions which are contrary to  Article
        3 ECHR". In addition, the findings that the A could  return  safely
        to his family also have to  be  reviewed  again  in  light  of  the
        grounds raised above which are now arguably unsafe.


    14. The appellant's home  area  is  in  Ranya  within  the  Sulamaniyah
        Governorate of the  IKR.  The  Secretary  of  State's  position  on
        returns  is  that  there  are  international   flights   to   Erbil
        International Airport (EBL) and Sulamaniyah  International  Airport
        (ISU) and that although all enforced returns are to  Baghdad  those
        willing to return voluntarily can travel directly to the IKR.
    15. When this was put to Ms Rutherford, she indicated her client  would
        not agree to return voluntarily, but that does  not  mean  that  he
        could not reasonably do so, as the reasons he claims  he  does  not
        want to return are those the Judge found to lack credibility in the
        decision. There  is  no  credible  reason  made  out  for  why  the
        appellant could not return voluntarily and therefore  could  travel
        directly to the IKR.
    16. The Judge specifically finds that the appellant had  not  made  out
        there was any reason why he could not return to the IKR which is  a
        sustainable finding. If the appellants have no documents with  them
        at the moment it was not made out they would not be issued  with  a
        Laissez Passers, which would enable them to be returned.
    17. The Judge finds that the appellant has family to support him in the
        IKR and noted that he had spoken to his father 20 days prior to the
        hearing. The Judge's conclusion that the appellant had  managed  to
        obtain documents from Iraq in support of the appeal and that  there
        was nothing made out  by  the  appellant  to  establish  that  such
        sources could not assist in re-documenting him  and  his  wife  has
        only been shown to be flawed so far as it relates  to  obtaining  a
        replacement CSID or a new INID.
    18. It was the appellant's case that he had left his identity documents
        behind in Iraq and there was nothing to  suggest  in  the  evidence
        that the documents were not still available and could not  be  sent
        to him by family members. The passport can be used to re-enter Iraq
        and if his family sent him and his wife their CSIDs they would also
        be able to travel internally to the IKR if returned to Baghdad.
    19. The Judge's findings regarding the availability of  family  support
        shows the family will  not  be  destitute  or  unable  to  properly
        relocate. Once in Iraq, they will be able  to  obtain  any  further
        documents that require in-person attendance, including attending to
        the  registration  of  their  children  if  this  has  not  already
        occurred.
    20. The Country Policy and Information Note, Iraq: Internal relocation,
        civil documentation and returns, Version 11.0, June 2020,  confirms
        the inability of the appellant to be able to obtain  a  replacement
        CSID in the UK but at Annex I states:


        CSID cards are being phased out and replaced by INID (Iraq National
        Identification) cards. It is not currently possible to apply for an
        INID card outside of Iraq. As a result, the Iraqi embassy in London
        are advising their nationals in the  UK  to  apply  instead  for  a
        'Registration Document (1957)' which they  can  use  to  apply  for
        other documents such as passports or an INID card  once  they  have
        returned to Iraq.


        The registration  document  (1957)  must  be  applied  for  on  the
        applicant's behalf by a nominated representative in Iraq. In  order
        to start the application, the  individual  requiring  documentation
        would normally provide at least one copy  of  a  national  identity
        document (see above list Q1, FAS) and complete a power of  attorney
        (to nominate a representative in Iraq) at the Iraqi  embassy  along
        with the embassy issued application forms. If they have  no  copies
        of identity documents they also would need to  complete  a  British
        power of attorney validated by the FCO and provide  parents  names,
        place and date of birth to their nominated representative in Iraq.


        Once issued the nominated representative will send the registration
        document (1957) to the applicant in the UK. The process  takes  1-2
        months.


        The HO cannot apply for documentation other than Laissez Passers on
        someone's behalf but the embassy is willing to check to see if  the
        individual already holds documents and provide copies if necessary


    21.  The  evidence  before  the  Judge  did  not  establish  that   the
        appellant's family could not act as a nominated  representative  in
        Iraq, especially as the male head of the household, his father,  is
        a person with whom he has been in contact, to enable him to acquire
        a registration document (1957), which is not the same as a  laissez
        passer, which is  a  single  use  document,  but  rather  a  formal
        identity document recognised by the authorities in Iraq.
    22. The Judge's finding that the appellant could  therefore  redocument
        himself, such as to enable him to return to Iraq  and  be  able  to
        reintegrate and function within the society  of  Iraq,  as  clearly
        implied by the Judge, has not been shown to be  a  finding  outside
        the range of those reasonably available to Judge on the evidence.
    23. It has not been made out the Judges overall decision to dismiss the
        appeal is outside the range of  findings  reasonably  open  to  the
        Judge on the evidence and,  accordingly,  in  accordance  with  the
        guidance of the Court of Appeal it is not appropriate for the Upper
        Tribunal to interfere any further in this matter.

Decision

    24. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 10 August 2021












