
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11142/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2019                             |On 21 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    n k t
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs G Brown, Dannielle Cohen Immigration Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andrews
    promulgated on 9 January 2019.

2.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  born  on  [~]  1986,  who
    claimed international protection as a refugee. For reasons  which  will
    become apparent, it is not appropriate for me to  say  more  about  the
    background facts or findings, suffice it to say that the judge rejected
    the appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

3.    Detailed  grounds  of  appeal  were  settled  by  Counsel,  the   most
    significant of which (ground 1) related to an alleged  failure  on  the
    judge's part to make findings in respect of certain  evidence.   First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kelly, in a decision of 7  February  2019,  granted
    permission to appeal on this  ground  but  refused  permission  on  the
    second, third and fourth grounds.

4.   There is a renewed application seeking  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds where it  had  been  refused.  It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to
    determine whether the permission  to  appeal  should  be  enlarged.  Ms
    Jones, for the respondent, properly conceded that there is an error  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  determination  and  the  proper
    course is for the decision to be set aside.

5.   In the light of that concession, my reasoning can  be  shortly  stated.
    In addition to the appellant and her husband giving evidence,  evidence
    was also adduced (both in a witness statement and orally) from Mr X (as
    I shall style him to preserve his anonymity) who was a  friend  of  the
    appellant. That evidence was subject to cross-examination.

6.   Paragraph 17 of the decision reads:

         "I then heard from  the  appellant's  second  witness  [Mr  X]  who
         adopted his 20 November 2018 witness statement with one correction.
          The second word on line 5 at paragraph 3 (not) should be  deleted.
         This statement presents a similar picture as  the  appellant's  and
         MR's statements.  It also serves that [Mr  X]  is  the  appellant's
         distant cousin and he also  knows  her  from  university.   [Mr  X]
         offered to speak to MR's family after they refused  the  appellant.
         MR's family did not accept  what  [Mr  X]  said  and  MR's  brother
         referenced honour killing saying that [Mr X] would not be spared if
         MR and the appellant married.  [Mr X] never returned to MR's family
         because he was afraid of the consequence for himself.  MR's  mother
         telephoned [Mr  X]  in  2007  saying  she  would  do  whatever  was
         necessary to get rid of the appellant.  [Mr X] then advised  MR  to
         leave the country saying it  was  too  dangerous  for  MR  and  the
         appellant to stay in Bangladesh.  In cross-examination this witness
         repeated some of  what  was  in  his  witness  statement.   In  re-
         examination he told me that he had no contact with [Mr P] (the  ICT
         Minister) but he had once seen [Mr P] at MR's family's home."

7.   In summarising counsel's submissions at paragraph 30 of  the  decision,
    it is recorded that Mrs Brown, for the appellant, stated  that  counsel
    for the respondent had not made any submissions as to  the  credibility
    of Mr X.  Mrs Brown submitted that he was  sufficiently  objective  and
    that the Tribunal should accept his evidence, namely that he intervened
    at MR's parents and knows Mr P to be a close relative of MR's mother.

8.   The judge dealt with credibility and  findings  at  paragraph  31,  and
    spoke there and elsewhere in the decision of considering  the  evidence
    "in the round". She mentions giving full account of all of the evidence
    that was before her whether referred to or not.   At  paragraph  36(vi)
    she says:

         "Mrs Brown pointed out that [counsel for the  respondent]  had  not
         made any specific submissions as to the credibility of [Mr  X]  the
         second witness at the hearing.  However [he] did invite me to  find
         the appellant not credible.  As such I do not  consider  that  [he]
         was in any way conceding that the second witness's evidence was all
         true."

9.   In paragraph 37 the judge also says that she has taken account  of  the
    fact that except as highlighted elsewhere "there is a reasonable  level
    of internal consistency in the appellant's own evidence and that of her
    witnesses". But she goes on to find that the appellant is not  credible
    and continues

         "in coming to these conclusions  I  have  taken  into  account  the
         evidence of the appellant's witnesses. I also do not find  credible
         that  their  claims  that  MR's  family  would  have  attacked   or
         threatened to kill the appellant".

10.  With respect to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  the  extracts  I  have
    quoted (and these are the only matters which touch on the  evidence  of
    Mr X) do not amount to a proper assessment of his credibility  and  the
    extent to which his evidence may have supported the  case  advanced  by
    the appellant. There is no judicial engagement at all.

11.  Any judge who  hears  live  evidence  must  give  proper  and  adequate
    findings of credibility in relation to each witnesses  whose  testimony
    is disputed.  Regrettably the judge gave no  independent  consideration
    to the credibility of Mr and the substance of his largely corroborative
    evidence in the course of concluding  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness.

12.  This appeal  must  be  allowed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal set aside. The error goes to the fundamental fact-finding role
    of the judge. Both Counsel concur that the proper course  is  to  remit
    this matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  afresh  by  a
    judge other than Judge Andrews. No findings of fact will be  preserved.
    An anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and I  renew
    it.

Notice of Decision

      1) Appeal allowed.

      2) Decision of First-tier Tribunal set aside;

      3) Matter remitted to First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  afresh  by  a
         judge other than Judge Andrews.

      4) No findings of fact preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         18 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
