
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11544/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 16 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     s m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. The appellant is a national of Kenya who was born in 1976.  He came  to
    the United Kingdom on 26 January 2001 with a work permit for employment
    as a circus acrobat which was extended as the appellant  continued  his
    career.  On 24 December 2004 he was granted leave based on his marriage
    to a British  citizen  JM  and  on  18  January  2007  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his marriage  which  however
    ended towards the end of 2010 or  early  2011.   The  couple  have  two
    children born 2005 and 2007.

 2. The appellant then formed a new relationship  with  SH.   They  have  a
    daughter born in 2015.  That relationship has also come to an end.  The
    appellant's current partner is KK.

 3. On 12 April 2017 the Secretary of State made a deportation order  under
    section  32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.   This  followed   the
    appellant's conviction on a guilty plea on 24 April 2015 for  rape  for
    which he was sentenced to four years and  three  months'  imprisonment.
    He was diagnosed with HIV in 2013, a condition that he  acquired  after
    arrival in the United Kingdom which he attributes to SH  who  had  been
    unwell prior to their meeting.

 4. The appellant applied for recognition as a refugee on being notified in
    May 2015 of the Secretary of State's intention to  make  a  deportation
    order as the result of his conviction.  This was on the basis  that  he
    would be unable to afford treatment in Kenya and that his life would be
    at risk because of his HIV status due to hostility towards  those  with
    this condition in Kenya.  His health status  and  conviction  would  be
    generally known because of Facebook posts on his account which had been
    placed by SH through unauthorised access to his account.  In  addition,
    the appellant relied on family life with his children and  wife  JM  as
    well as a private life he has established here.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the claim for reasons given in a  letter
    dated 18 April 2017 which included certification under section  94B  of
    the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   Following  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in Kiarie and Byndloss v SSHD [2017] UKSC
    42 the decision was reviewed and a further decision was made  dated  23
    October 2017 rejecting the claims.

 6. As with the earlier decision, the  Secretary  of  State  certified  the
    refugee claim by reference to  section  72(2)  of  the  2002  Act  and,
    furthermore, considered the appellant was  excluded  from  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339D of the  Immigration  Rules
    because  of  his  conviction  and  subsequent  sentence.   It  was  not
    considered there was a real risk of breach of Articles 2 and 3  of  the
    Human Rights Convention and it was also considered that  the  appellant
    would need to provide evidence of "a very strong Article  8  claim"  in
    the light of the length of sentence and significant public interest  in
    his deportation.  The appellant had not provided any  evidence  of  his
    eldest  children's  domestic  circumstances,  of  the  nature  of   his
    relationship with them or what was in their best interests.  It was not
    accepted that he had a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with them having provided no evidence of contact  with  them  after  he
    separated from their mother at the latest in 2011.  The  appellant  had
    confirmed he had not seen his daughter from SH. It would not be  unduly
    harsh for the children to remain in the United Kingdom  on  deportation
    of the appellant.  It was not accepted that there was family life  with
    JM; the appellant had provided no evidence of her current location  and
    had acknowledged that that relationship had ended.  The  appellant  was
    not socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom  in  the
    light of his  conviction  or  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Kenya where he had lived until  he  was
    25 years old, a country he had visited in January and February 2014 and
    where he has family.

 7. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.  He found the appellant  had  failed  to
    rebut the presumption provisions in section 72(2).  He did not  address
    the  exclusion  point  in  relation  to  humanitarian  protection   but
    nevertheless considered the appeal on Articles 3  and  8  grounds.   He
    found that the appellant would not be at risk of harm  if  returned  to
    his home village and had failed to establish that he could not turn  to
    the police for help.  It would not be unduly harsh  to  expect  him  to
    relocate to another area of  Kenya  where  his  offending  history  and
    medical condition would be unknown.  The fact of the  appellant  having
    HIV alone was insufficient to engage Article 3 and the judge considered
    it was likely the appellant would be  able  to  access  medication  and
    treatment that he needs to stay well in Kenya.  In respect of Article 8
    the judge found the appellant did not have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his British citizen children.   He  had  not
    met his youngest daughter and  apart  from  speaking  to  them  on  the
    telephone the appellant had not provided any evidence that he  had  any
    involvement  in  making  the  important  decisions  about   his   elder
    children's education or care or that  he  supported  them  financially.
    Even if it were in the children's best interests for the  appellant  to
    remain, that consideration was outweighed by  the  public  interest  in
    deportation because of the seriousness of the offending.  The appellant
    was unable to bring himself within the exceptions in  sections  117C(4)
    and (5) of the 2002 Act and there were no very compelling circumstances
    in his case.

 8. Although the appellant was unrepresented at the hearing of that appeal,
    counsel appeared at the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  on  30  May
    2018 following a grant of permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bird.  The Upper Tribunal found error  of  law  in  its  decision
    dated 31 May 2018; a copy is annexed.  The  grounds  of  challenge  had
    been that there had been a failure by the First-tier Tribunal  to  give
    reasons for findings of fact and a failure to apply the  relevant  case
    law.  As will be seen from the Upper Tribunal decision, permission  was
    given at the hearing for the introduction of a second ground of  appeal
    relating to a procedural unfairness based on the  appellant's  lack  of
    representation  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   No  amendment  was
    however permitted in relation to the  section  72  certificate  as  the
    Upper Tribunal found nothing in the point raised.

 9. The case was then transferred to the present panel.  At the hearing  on
    17 August the appellant was again without representation.  Duncan Lewis
    Solicitors had notified the Tribunal on  the  afternoon  prior  to  the
    hearing that they  were  required  to  withdraw  from  the  case.   The
    appellant had been sent papers  in  connection  with  the  case  as  an
    attachment to an e-mail; he had  last  seen  his  solicitors  in  April
    whilst in detention and otherwise the only previous contact had been on
    receipt of the notice of hearing.   We  decided  that  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice for the appeal  to  be  adjourned  again  for  the
    appellant to obtain representation.  He was not successful however  and
    appeared before us accompanied  by  his  current  partner  KK  when  he
    confirmed that he was ready to proceed.   The  appellant  handed  in  a
    revised expert's report that had been provided to him by  his  previous
    solicitors together with a letter of support  from  Kevin  Lovick,  the
    Operations Manager of Kodiak Security Limited  in  Great  Yarmouth,  as
    well as notice of appointment for a  flexible  sigmoidoscopy  at  James
    Pagett University Hospital in Great Yarmouth on 9 November.

10. We took care to ensure the appellant's  full  participation.   He  gave
    evidence through an interpreter.  We summarised for him the  issues  in
    the case at the outset as:

   i) Whether his deportation would breach Article 3  by  reference  to  his
      concerns over the availability of treatment for HIV in Kenya and,


  ii) Whether he would be at risk of harm by virtue of  previous  disclosure
      of that condition or others becoming aware of it when  seeking  access
      to treatment in Kenya.

11. We reminded  the  appellant  that  the  conclusion  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in respect of section 72(2) remains undisturbed.  It was
    not argued at the hearing on 30 May that the First-tier Tribunal  erred
    by failing to consider exclusion of  humanitarian  protection;  on  the
    evidence of the conviction, we are satisfied the Secretary of State was
    correct in this regard.  There has been no challenge to the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings under Article 8.

12. We asked the appellant questions for clarification as to  his  life  in
    Kenya where he had a partner and child  before  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom and for more detail on the identities of  the  parties  to  the
    Facebook posts as well as the current state of his health  and  related
    matters.  Prior to cross-examination we obtained  copies  of  two  CIPN
    reports.  The first is Kenya: Sexual Orientation  and  Gender  Identity
    dated  March  2017  and  the  second,  Kenya:  Background   Information
    including Actors of Protection and Internal Relocation  dated  February
    2018.  We gave  these  to  the  appellant  to  read  during  the  lunch
    adjournment together with a revision to his initial statement  for  him
    to double check its accuracy.  As it transpired,  we  saw  no  need  to
    refer to those  reports  in  reaching  our  findings.  Mr  Deller  made
    submissions on terms that deportation would not breach  Article  3  and
    the appellant concluded with remarks after conferring with his  partner
    regarding the uncertainty over his state of health  and  how  he  would
    fare on return.

THE EXPERT AND COUNTRY EVIDENCE

13. We begin with the expert evidence of Professor Aguilar.  He is Director
    of the Centre for the Study of Religion and Politics at  University  of
    St Andrews and explained that he had  published  extensively  on  Kenya
    where he lived between 1987 and 1990 as Registrar for  Marriages  in  a
    Catholic Diocese and in 1992 working for the Catholic Church  and  Save
    the Children Fund Canada.  He has published  a  range  of  material  on
    Kenya and explains that he completed a PhD in  Social  Anthropology  at
    SOAS, University of  London,  in  1994  on  the  study  of  social  and
    religious practices among the Boorana of Northern Kenya.

14. The documents examined for his report were the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly and the grant of permission to  appeal  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bird.  Professor Aguilar explains that he had  been
    asked to comment on:

   i) The level of risk faced by those suffering with  HIV  from  the  wider
      community in Kenya.

  ii) The risk that the appellant might be  perceived  as  gay  due  to  his
      illness.


 iii) Medical treatment available for HIV sufferers in Kenya.


  iv)  Additional  risk  factors  by  reference  to  the  appellant's   rape
      conviction.


   v) Whether the appellant could relocate within Kenya to avoid or minimise
      risk.


  vi) Whether the appellant could relocate within Kenya to avoid or minimise
      risk.


 vii) Whether there was any possibility the appellant could seek  protection
      in the event that he was targeted due to his illness or as a perceived
      homosexual.


15. Professor Aguilar makes extensive reference to a report by Avert  which
    reveals that 1.6 million people are reported to be living with  HIV  in
    Kenya in 2016 where there is a  5.4%  adult  HIV  prevalence.   64%  of
    adults are receiving antiretroviral treatment.  Professor Aguilar notes
    that according to Avert, HIV prevalence among men who have sex with men
    is almost three times that among  the  general  population.   The  most
    recent statistics from 2010 estimate HIV prevalence among men who  have
    sex with men at 18.2%.  He refers to  sodomy  being  illegal  in  Kenya
    carrying a prison sentence of up to fourteen years and legal and social
    attitudes lead to high levels of stigma and discrimination towards  men
    who have sex with men as well as other members of the  LGBT  community.
    In 2016 around  940,000  adults  and  60,000  children  were  accessing
    antiretroviral treatment.  Professor Aguilar concludes that:

         "The level of risk faced by those who suffered from  HIV  from  the
         wider community in Kenya is very significant and  hide  the  effect
         that physical attacks by police and vigilante groups  have  on  men
         who have sex with  men  and  therefore  associated  by  the  Kenyan
         general public with HIV amounts to 24% at national level."

16. As to the risk the appellant may be perceived as gay  due  to  his  HIV
    status, he states:

         "Due to the high level of HIV/AIDS suffers among the gay  community
         in Kenya it follows that there is a very probability [sic]  that  a
         person such as the appellant will be perceived as gay in Kenya."

17. As to the availability of medical treatment for HIV sufferers in Kenya,
    Professor Aguilar notes that in June 2017 the government  upgraded  the
    quality of treatment to HIV sufferers by introducing  drugs  that  were
    only available within the private sector of high earning  Kenyans.   He
    acknowledges that this introduction of new drugs is an advancement  but
    notes the UNITAID press  release  suggested  only  60%  of  the  Kenyan
    population receives treatment for HIV and  of  those  only  27,000  are
    receiving the new drug introduced by them in 2017.

18. Professor Aguilar also contends that if disclosed, a  person  convicted
    of rape will run  a  grave  danger  of  being  attacked  by  the  local
    neighbourhood where mob justice is a current phenomenon illustrated  by
    reference to a recent mob lynching.  He continues:

         "Internal relocation would not minimise any risk of  discrimination
         and/or persecution against the appellant because of having HIV, and
         therefore being associated with the gay community of Kenya."

    He notes that not only is homosexuality criminalised within Kenyan  law
    "but also by the religious leaders  of  Islam  and  Christianity".   He
    illustrates this by reference to a recent case in  the  High  Court  of
    Mombasa upholding the legality of anal examinations of men suspected of
    engaging in same sex sexual activity and references in the Human Rights
    Watch Report of 2017.  He concludes that the appellant would be  unable
    to live safely in Kenya if he is perceived as a  member  of  LGBTI  and
    consequently could not be open about his HIV due to risk of persecution
    for this reason.

19. The most recent version of his  report  has  the  following  additional
    points:

         (i)  With 64% of adults being able to access HIV  treatment  it  is
             most likely the appellant will not have access to treatment as
             those who are already receiving treatment will continue to  do
             so.

         (ii) The fact that the  appellant  having  been  abroad  would  not
             assist as he would need to register for treatment; any medical
             treatment is a lottery.

         (iii)    He could not comment professionally on the effects of  not
             having HIV treatment as he was not a medical doctor.

         (iv) The likelihood of the appellant being among the 36%  who  will
             not receive treatment is very high as he is not  enrolled  for
             treatment at the moment and would need to start by registering
             domicile with the police and checking with a local hospital on
             possible treatment.

         (v)  According to recent indicators Kenya had 11.5% unemployment in
             2017.

         (vi) Carriers of HIV still carry a stigma that relates to the  fact
             that the illness has the same symptoms of lack of strength and
             lack of weight as  victims  of  witchcraft  have  in  cultural
             terms. Professor Aguilar acknowledges that it  is  not  within
             his remit or instruction to expand on the issue in relation to
             witchcraft.



OUR ASSESSMENT OF THE EXPERT AND COUNTRY EVIDENCE

20. We have no doubt as to Professor Aguilar's academic expertise on Kenyan
    affairs, however his report does not provide any source or evidence for
    his conclusion on the risk that the appellant will be perceived as  gay
    due to the high level of HIV  sufferers  among  the  gay  community  in
    Kenya.  As submitted by Mr Deller, a leap is made in this respect which
    is insufficiently reasoned.  The Avert  report  does  not  provide  any
    support for his conclusion.  Professor Aguilar refers to 18.2%  of  HIV
    prevalence amongst MSM as opposed to 5.9% by the population as a whole.
     Whilst it is more likely that a man with HIV based on those statistics
    could be gay, those statistics do not make it very probable that a  man
    with HIV would be regarded as gay.  The Avert report analyses the  risk
    groups which includes sex workers, MSM, people  who  inject  drugs  and
    young people.  Of the drug users, an estimated 18.3%  who  inject  were
    living with HIV.  This is comparable to  and  indeed  may  include  the
    percentage of MSM who have HIV.  There is no evidence showing that drug
    users by virtual of these statistics are at risk of being perceived  as
    gay and are ill-treated as a result.

21. As to whether the appellant would be at risk simply by virtue of  being
    known to have HIV,  Professor  Aguilar  notes  a  very  high  level  of
    discrimination against those  having  HIV  and  AIDS  who  are  gay  or
    perceived to be gay rather than against the HIV population as a  whole.
    The Avert report explains in respect of stigma and discrimination:

         "Although awareness of HIV and AIDS is comparatively high in  Kenya
         and there have been countrywide anti-stigma campaigns  many  people
         living with  HIV  continue  to  face  high  levels  of  stigma  and
         discrimination.   This  deters  many  people  living  with  HIV   -
         particularly vulnerable groups - from seeking vital HIV services".

22. The source for this is not entirely clear from  the  footnotes  to  the
    report which includes a wide range of reports  and  material.   We  are
    assisted however from a further passage in the report:

         "Unfortunately people most at  risk  of  HIV  still  faced  stigma,
         discrimination and violence.  This  adds  to  their  vulnerability.
         Research in 2014 shows that 44% of female sex workers, 24%  of  men
         who have sex with men and 57%  of  people  who  inject  drugs  were
         arrested or beaten up by police or city' askaris' (in the last  six
         months)."

23. The appellant is in none of these risk categories.

24. We note from the Avert report that more than half of  the  1.6  million
    people living with HIV in Kenya are unaware of their HIV status.   This
    would seem to suggest that of those not receiving treatment, most  were
    not doing so because they were unaware. This aspect is  not  considered
    by Professor Aguilar. A fair reading  of  the  Avert  report  indicates
    that, having regard to the statistics in [15] above, most if not all of
    those who are aware of their HIV status are  accessing  medication  and
    treatment.

25. Although he acknowledges the advances made with the introduction of new
    drugs, Professor Aguilar does not make it clear  why  he  considers  it
    most likely the appellant will not have access to  treatment  based  on
    the fact of others already receiving treatment.  The Avert report  does
    not indicate that the doors are closed to those who had not  previously
    received treatment. No source is  given  for  his  assertion  that  the
    appellant would need to register for treatment and, if he  does,  there
    is no evidence that this would be a barrier.    The  Kenyan  government
    has taken a positive approach to not only prevention but also treatment
    which is generally available.  We find on the evidence that if  someone
    has HIV in Kenya, he or she will receive treatment if sought. It is not
    suggested by Professor Aguilar that the medication which the  appellant
    receives to control his HIV status is not available in Kenya or that  a
    similar medication would not be available if the specific drug is not.

THE APPELLANT'S EVIDENCE

26. We turn now to the evidence of the appellant.  A  key  matter  emerging
    from his Home Office interview in 2015  is  a  statement  of  his  fear
    because he believed people are killed if they have HIV illustrated by a
    friend who had met such a fate.  He also expressed concern over  having
    to pay for medication and the absence of any trust from his family  and
    friends.  He knew that news of his HIV status had reached Kenya from  a
    friend who had visited.  He refers to his father's  death  in  December
    2014 and the previous visit which he had made to Kenya in January 2014.
     He did not talk to his two brothers and sisters.

27. In response to our questions the following evidence emerged material to
    this claim:

   i) The appellant receives check-ups every three months in Great  Yarmouth
      and his HIV virus (CD load) is undetectable.


  ii) He is not gay.


 iii) The appellant left school at the age of 14.  His  father  had  been  a
      kitchen porter.  The appellant  with  others  had  learned  to  be  an
      acrobat and had been informally trained.  He also used to obtain  paid
      work in hotels.  When living  in  Mombasa  after  leaving  school  and
      working in his troupe, he had lived with his cousin.  He is  in  touch
      with his brothers and sisters by telephone.  They are younger than  he
      is  and  all  live  with  their  mother.   He  used  to  support  them
      financially and his current girlfriend used to send money.   They  are
      aware of his conviction and his HIV status.  None has HIV  themselves.
      He had not had contact with his cousin since he had his problems here.
       The appellant also has an uncle with whom he is not in  communication
      and an aunt in Kenya.


28. Under cross-examination the appellant explained:


   i) His family are Christian except for one sister who is Muslim.


  ii) He would not be accepted (by his family) because of his illness.  They
      had told him that if he sat next to them  or  his  finger  bled,  they
      might catch it which he attributes to a lack of understanding on their
      part.


 iii) As  to  why  people  might  think  he  is  homosexual,  the  appellant
      attributed this  to  Professor  Aguilar.   He  referred  also  to  the
      operation on his back passage which would  make  people  think  he  is
      homosexual.


29. In response to our further questions the appellant answered:


   i) He is in contact with his former partner in Kenya.  Their child is 18.
       She lives in their village. Their child does sometimes.  He described
      the size of his village as many more than Great Yarmouth and it was 45
      minutes by car from Mombasa.


  ii) The Facebook account was closed in May 2018.  He was not aware who had
      typed the record of posts in the evidence before us.  Of  the  authors
      of the posts, most live in Kenya.


OUR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS


30. We have already made our finding on the availability of  HIV  treatment
    in Kenya and now  turn  to  our  assessment  of  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant.  Unlike the position stated at interview, we find  that  the
    appellant is in regular contact with his family, his former partner and
    child as well as his friends in  Kenya.   Most  of  the  posts  put  on
    Facebook by his friends are generally supportive him.  The  posts  show
    that the contributors were aware that he was  not  the  author  of  the
    declamatory statements regarding his conviction and health status.   We
    have no doubt that his family and former partner will have  been  upset
    by the discovery of his serious conviction and also his HIV status but,
    as time has passed particularly in the light of his evidence of  recent
    more regular contact, we find that they will provide him with emotional
    support until he finds his feet.


31. We find that the appellant himself does not believe that  he  would  be
    perceived as gay. Instead, he depends on this aspect of his claim which
    was not mentioned at interview, because  of  the  report  by  Professor
    Aguilar.  We are not satisfied that the risk of attribution as  to  the
    appellant's orientation is objectively well-founded.   We  accept  that
    despite efforts by the Kenyan government, people with HIV  face  stigma
    and discrimination.  However, the appellant is not in a group for which
    there is a reasonable likelihood of violence.  He comes  from  a  place
    near to Mombasa and most recently lived and worked in  Mombasa  itself.
    The evidence does not establish that someone living in a  sophisticated
    urban environment faces  a  risk  of  stigma  and  discrimination  that
    reaches the high threshold required for a claim to be established under
    Article 3.


32. Furthermore, we are satisfied that treatment for  the  appellant's  HIV
    condition will be available in Kenya and that there are no barriers  to
    the appellant accessing antiretroviral treatment. As noted in the Avert
    report,  in  2015  Kenya  adopted  the  World   Health   Organisation's
    recommendation to immediately offer treatment to people diagnosed  with
    HIV and that as a result in  2016  around  940,000  adults  and  60,000
    children  were  accessing  this  treatment.   The  evidence  does   not
    establish that cost is a barrier to treatment.  There  is  no  evidence
    that the medication available would be unsuitable  for  the  appellant.
    The appellant will be able to find employment.  He has shown that he is
    resourceful and likeable.  He will bring with him a better  command  of
    English than we suspect he had before leaving Kenya.  The  unemployment
    rate indicates that there is a realistic possibility he will find  work
    and there is no risk of him being destitute.


33. In the light of these findings it is unnecessary for us to consider the
    consequences of the appellant being  unable  to  access  antiretroviral
    treatment in the context of the  matters  considered  by  the  European
    Court of Human Rights in Paposhvili and  considered  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] 1 WLR 2933.  There is no evidence
    that the appellant would be returning to a country which  for  economic
    reasons could not provide him with basic living standards.


34. By way of conclusion, the appellant has not demonstrated on  the  lower
    standard of proof there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  he
    would encounter any harm by virtue of publication of  his  HIV  status.
    Accordingly, we are not satisfied that deportation of the appellant  to
    Kenya would result in an infringement of his absolute rights under  the
    Human Rights Convention.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed
       Dated 6 November 2018

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
