








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11943/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 27th September 2018              |On: 12 October 2018                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                               Mr Mohammed [M]
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:  Mr G O'Ceallaigh, counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild
& Dyer
For the Respondent:  Mrs A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 1 June 1986.  He  appeals
      with permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      promulgated on  20  June  2018  dismissing  his  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights appeal.

   2. At the commencement of the hearing before me, I was informed  by  both
      parties that they were in  agreement  that  there  had  been  material
      errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, as  set  out
      in the grounds of appeal. They  submitted  that  the  decision  should
      accordingly be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
      fresh decision to be made before another Judge.

   3. The grounds in the application for permission asserted that the  Judge
      failed to resolve a material dispute of fact. The location of  Shekhan
      was central to the appellant's appeal. He had explained in  his  later
      statement that  he  had  been  mistaken  concerning  the  location  of
      Shekhan, which is Nineveh Province, though geographically the town  is
      close to Erbil and Mosul. Nineveh Province is a contested area.

   4. It was thus contended that the appellant would be at risk if  returned
      there in accordance with paragraph 1 of the headnote  of  AA  (Article
      15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) and paragraph 1 of the  Annex  of
      AA (Iraq) in the Court of Appeal dated  11  July  2017.  It  was  also
      relevant to where the appellant's family may currently be, why he  has
      lost touch with them and whether he can obtain a CSID  in  Iraq.  This
      matter was not resolved.

   5. Secondly, the finding  that  the  appellant  could  safely  internally
      relocate  to  the  Kurdish  controlled  IKR,   was   reached   without
      consideration of material parts of AA (Iraq):  A person could only  be
      returned directly to the IKR if they had  previously  originated  from
      there - headnote 17.

   6. The Tribunal thus failed to consider the feasibility of the  appellant
      internally relocating to IKR and in particular how he would reach  the
      area from Baghdad and alternatively, his safety in  that  city  -  (BA
      (Returns to Baghdad) CG [2017] UKUT 18).

   7. It was further contended that the Tribunal asserted that the appellant
      would be granted financial assistance by the Iraq  authorities  as  he
      was previously issued with a laissez passer by the  Dutch  authorities
      for his  return  to  the  UK  in  2006  [37].  There  was  however  no
      explanation by the Judge why the Iraqi authorities would treat this as
      proof of the appellant's identity. The laissez-passer considered in AA
      as proof of identity is one issued by the Iraqi authorities - headnote
      9. The Judge failed to consider how the appellant would obtain a CSID.
      The Judge failed to consider at all whether  the  appellant  would  be
      able to obtain a travel document or the evidence submitted as  to  his
      contact with the Iraqi embassy.

   8. In addition it is contended that the Judge failed to consider or refer
      to the  expert  report  of  Ms  Laizer,  who  considered  the  massive
      displacement of people in the contested  areas  and  the  considerable
      difficulties in tracing family as a result., which is material to  the
      appellant's evidence of loosing touch with his family.  She  also  set
      out in great detail the logistical issues to be considered  pending  a
      possible return to IKR.

      Assessment

   9. Having considered the grounds of  appeal,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
      concession made on behalf of the respondent was properly made.

  10. I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision,  which
      will have to be re-made. The  parties  were  agreed  that  this  is  a
      suitable case to be heard before the First-tier Tribunal as this would
      be a 'de novo appeal'.

  11. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
      regarding the remitting of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
      fresh decision.

  12. Having regard to the extent of fact finding which is necessary for the
      decision to be re-made, and having regard to the overriding objective,
      I conclude that it would be just and fair to remit the case.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a
      fresh decision to be made before  another  Judge.  The  time  estimate
      given is two hours.


      Anonymity direction not made.










      Signed         Date 5 October 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer








