
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11962/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Remote Hearing by Skype              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th March 2021                   |On 24th March 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA




                                   Between


                                    H E M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountain Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

ANOYMITY


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"). As  this
a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless  and
until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, HEM is  granted  anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  her  or
any member of her family.  This direction  applies  amongst  others  to  all
parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


INTRODUCTION


 1. The hearing before me on 16th March 2021 took  the  form  of  a  remote
    hearing  using  skype  for  business.  Neither  party  objected.    The
    appellant did not join the hearing, but I was  informed  by  Mr  Howard
    that she was at the offices of Fountains Solicitors and  she  would  be
    available if required, although he did not propose to call her to  give
    evidence. In any event, she will be kept informed of  the  progress  of
    her appeal.  The representatives were able to see and hear me and  each
    other throughout the hearing.  I sat at the  Birmingham  Civil  Justice
    Centre. I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the same  way
    as I would have been if the parties had attended the hearing  together.
    I was satisfied: that no party has been prejudiced; and  that,  insofar
    as there has been any  restriction  on  a  right  or  interest,  it  is
    justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it  was
    in the interests of justice  and  in  accordance  with  the  overriding
    objective to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present  need
    to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.
     I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt
    with fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance
    of the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues  that  arise,  and  the
    anticipated costs and resources of the parties.   At  the  end  of  the
    hearing I was satisfied that both parties had been able to  participate
    fully in the proceedings.


Background


 2. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia.  She arrived in the UK on 13th
    January 2019 and claimed asylum on  17th  April  2019.   The  appellant
    claimed to be of Oromo ethnicity and at risk upon return to Ethiopia as
    a member of the OLF.  Her claim  was  refused  by  the  respondent  for
    reasons  set  out  in  a  decision  dated  27th  November  2019.    The
    appellant's appeal was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan
    for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 19th February 2020.


 3. The background to the appellant's claim for international protection is
    summarised at paragraphs [2] and [3] of the decision of Judge Chohan:


         "2.  ... The appellant  worked  as  a  housemaid  in  Saudi  Arabia
         between 2011 and 2019. The appellant's husband had been working  in
         Saudi Arabia as a driver for a much longer  period.  The  appellant
         claimed that she and  her  husband  are  of  Oromo  ethnicity.  The
         appellant's husband was a member  of  the  Oromo  Liberation  Front
         (OLF). In 2017, the appellant claims that she returned to  Ethiopia
         for a visit for a period of three  months.  During  that  time  the
         appellant claims that she witnessed the mistreatment of  the  Oromo
         people.  At one point, the appellant claims  that  her  father  had
         been detained and mistreated. Upon  return  to  Saudi  Arabia,  the
         appellant claims that she began to  undertake  activities  for  the
         OLF. Sometime in 2017, the appellant claims that  her  husband  was
         deported  from  Saudi  Arabia  to  Ethiopia.   In   Ethiopia,   the
         appellant's  husband,  according  to  the  appellant,  remains   in
         detention and his whereabouts are unknown.


         3.   With the assistance of  her  employer  in  Saudi  Arabia,  the
         appellant  obtained  a  Visa  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.  The
         appellant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  13  January  2019.
         However, it was not until 17 April 2019 that the appellant  claimed
         asylum. The appellant gave  birth  to  a  daughter  in  the  United
         Kingdom on 26 March 2019. "


 4. The appellant gave evidence at the hearing of  her  appeal  through  an
    interpreter.  The findings and conclusions of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Chohan are set out at paragraphs [8] to [28] of  the  decision.   Judge
    Chohan accepted the appellant is of Oromo ethnicity.   He  went  on  to
    consider the appellant's affiliation with the OLF.  At  paragraph  [10]
    of the decision, Judge Chohan refers to a letter from the  OLF,  United
    Kingdom, dated 3rd January 2020.  The  author  of  the  letter  is  the
    Chairman of the OLF committee in the UK, Mr Terefe Gesifata Belay.   At
    paragraphs [11] to [13] of the decision,  Judge  Chohan  addressed  the
    concerns that he had regarding the claims made  in  the  letter.  Judge
    Chohan concluded, at [13], said:


         ".... When one stands back and considers the appellant's claim  and
         the OLF letter, they do seem like two  different  claims.  For  the
         reasons set out above, I attach no weight to the OLF letter.  In my
         view,  rather  than  support  the   appellant's   claim,   it   has
         fundamentally undermined her claim as a whole. It  does  seem  that
         the OLF letter has been submitted without a detailed  consideration
         of its contents. Had that been done, it would  have  been  apparent
         that it falls far short in supporting the appellant's claim."


 5. Judge Chohan went on to address  the  appellant's  claim  that  she  is
    married and that her husband had been deported  from  Saudi  Arabia  to
    Ethiopia.   At paragraphs [16] to [18] of the  decision,  Judge  Chohan
    said:


         "16. Even if I were to give the appellant benefit of the doubt  and
         accept that she is married as claimed,  for  the  reasons  set  out
         above, I do  not  find  her  account  to  be  credible.  There  are
         significant flaws in the appellant's  account  which  fundamentally
         damage the appellant's credibility as a  whole.  In  my  view,  the
         appellant has simply put forward an account in order to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom, perhaps to seek a better life. That  I  do  not
         hold against her, but it is  not  a  reason  for  granting  refugee
         status.


         17.  Considering the facts and evidence in their entirety  and  for
         the reasons set out above, I find the appellant has  never  been  a
         member or supporter of the OLF and has never been  of  any  adverse
         interest to the authorities in Ethiopia. Irrespective of my adverse
         credibility findings, I must still consider if the appellant  would
         be at risk if she were to be removed.


         18,  In short, if the appellant were to be removed to Ethiopia  she
         would face no real  risk  of  persecution,  serious  harm  or  ill-
         treatment. I have considered the country guidance case of  MB  (OLF
         and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 000303 and other objective
         material submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant.  In  view  of  my
         findings, the  appellant  does  not  fall  into  any  of  the  risk
         categories identified in the CG case.  My attention was  not  drawn
         to any evidence to suggest that the appellant would be at risk  for
         simply being a returned failed asylum seeker. No doubt,  on  return
         the appellant may well be questioned by the authorities but because
         she has never been of any adverse interest, she  should  experience
         little, if any, difficulties.  According  to  the  appellant's  own
         account she left Ethiopia in 2011 for  Saudi  Arabia;  returned  to
         Ethiopia in 2017; and then went back to Saudi Arabia.  At  no  time
         has the appellant stated that she  had  any  problems  entering  or
         leaving Ethiopia. Similarly, she should have  no  problems  if  she
         were to be removed. "


The appeal before me


 6. The appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  seven  separate
    grounds.  She was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Keane on 6th April 2020 on the first ground only.  The  appellant
    claims Judge Chohan failed to make any  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's sur place activities for the OLF.  She refers to the letter
    from the OLF dated 3rd January 2020 which  refers  to  the  appellant's
    attendance at an Oromo Activist Meeting on 1st December  2019  and  the
    OLF AGM on 9th November 2019.  The appellant claims Judge Chohan failed
    to make findings as to whether the appellant is accepted to  have  been
    involved in any sur place activities.  In granting  permission,  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Keane said:


         "... It was,  however,  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  arrive  at
         findings in respect of all material  contentions  advanced  by  the
         appellant. The appellant contended that he (sic) had embarked  upon
         sur place activities in the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge  did  not
         arrive at an explicit finding  as  to  whether  the  appellant  had
         embarked on such activities and if so whether his (sic) undertaking
         of such activities in the United Kingdom would expose him (sic)  to
         a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  upon  his  (sic)  return  to
         Ethiopia..."


 7. The appellant renewed the application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the  remaining  grounds.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on the remaining grounds on  6th
    July 2020.


 8. At the hearing of the appeal before me, I invited Mr Howard to draw  my
    attention to the evidence relied upon by the appellant  in  support  of
    her claim that she has been involved in sur place  activities  for  the
    OLF.  The appellant arrived in the UK on  13th  January  2019,  and  Mr
    Howard accepts she made no reference to any sur place activities during
    the screening interview  completed  on  17th  April  2019.   Mr  Howard
    submits that  is  not  surprising  given  the  short  period  that  the
    appellant had been in the UK before she made her claim for asylum.  The
    appellant signed a witness statement dated 21st May 2019 in support  of
    her claim for  international  protection.   Mr  Howard  quite  properly
    accepts that again, the appellant made no reference in  that  statement
    to any sur place activities in the UK.   Mr Howard  also  accepts  that
    there is no reference by the appellant to any sur place  activities  in
    the UK in the asylum  interview  record  that  was  completed  on  13th
    November 2019.  Following the refusal of her claim by the respondent on
    27th November 2019, the appellant made a statement in reply, dated 14th
    January 2020.  Mr Howard drew my attention to paragraphs [17] and  [21]
    of that statement in which she states:


         "17. I am actively involved with the Oromo Liberation Front  (OLF).
         I have provided evidence to corroborate this.


         ...


         21.  I have been actively involved with the OLF. My life will be in
         danger as a result."


 9. For the sake of completeness, I also note that at paragraph [18] of her
    statement dated 14th January  2020,  the  appellant  states:  "I  am  a
    supporter of the OLF.  I  have  evidence  from  the  OLF  regarding  my
    membership. My husband was also a member of the OLF.".


10. Mr Howard, quite properly in my judgement, accepts that the appellant's
    own evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  regarding  her  sur  place
    activities, was limited.  She essentially relied upon the  matters  set
    out in the letter from the OLF dated 3rd January 2021.


11. The respondent has filed and  serve  a  Rule  24  response  dated  19th
    October 2020.  The  respondent  submits  that  the  alleged  supporting
    evidence for the appellant's activities in the UK on behalf of the OLF,
    came from a letter  that  Judge  Chohan  found  to  be  unreliable  and
    contradictory.


12. I did not call upon Mr Diwnycz to respond to the submissions made by Mr
    Howard. Having heard the submissions made by Mr Howard, I informed  the
    parties that there is in my judgement, no material error of law in  the
    decision of Judge Chohan  capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  I informed the parties that I dismiss the appeal  and  that  I
    would set out my reasons for doing so, in writing.


13. It was in my judgement open to Judge Chohan to dismiss the  appeal  for
    the reasons set out in the decision promulgated on 19th February  2020.
    I reject the claim made by the appellant that in reaching the  decision
    Judge Chohan failed to make any findings in relation to the appellant's
    sur place activities for the  OLF.   The  appellant  herself  had  only
    referred to being actively involved with the OLF in  the  most  general
    and vaguest terms. Her account was devoid of any detail  regarding  her
    sur place activities that the First-tier Tribunal Judge could  properly
    address.  Her simple assertion that she was actively involved with  the
    OLF relied upon what was said by Mr Tefere Gesifata Belay, the Chairman
    or the OLF Committee in the UK, in his letter dated 3rd  January  2020.
    He states that the appellant had wanted a letter ".. That would  verify
    her involvement in OLF .. political activities while living in  Oromia,
    Ethiopia..".  It forms no part of the appellant's claim  that  she  was
    engaged in  any  political  activities  while  living  in  or  visiting
    Ethiopia.  The  appellant's  claim  is  that  she  began  to  undertake
    activities for the OLF when she  returned  to  Saudi  Arabia  in  2017,
    having witnessed the mistreatment of the Oromo people during her  visit
    to Ethiopia.


14. In his letter Mr Tefere Gesifata Belay states:


         "... Since her arrival in the  UK  [the  appellant]  has  continued
         participating in public meetings and  demonstrations  organised  by
         OLF against the Ethiopian government..."


    Mr Belay refers to the appellant having attended, on 1st December 2019,
    an Oromo activist meeting in Bolton and, on 9th November 2019,  an  OLF
    Annual General Meeting in Birmingham.  He refers to the  demonstrations
    and meetings in the UK being open to the public and being published  or
    shared on different social media outlets that include OLF websites.  He
    states:


         "Therefore, it is highly  likely  that  [the  appellant],  who  had
         already been targeted in Ethiopia, would come to the  attention  of
         the  government  and  could  be  arrested  upon  her   arrival   in
         Ethiopia.."


15. The appellant does not claim that she  had  already  been  targeted  in
    Ethiopia. It is in my  judgement  clear  that  Judge  Chohan  carefully
    considered the letter provided by Mr Tefere Gesifata Belay  and  relied
    upon by the appellant to support her  claim.   The  appellant  did  not
    herself give evidence to the effect that she had been involved  in  any
    political activities in Ethiopia or that she had participated in public
    meetings and demonstrations organised by the OLF against the  Ethiopian
    government.  She did not even refer to having attended the  two  events
    referred to by Mr Tefere Gesifata Belay or provide any detail regarding
    her participation in those events.


16. In my judgement it was undoubtedly open to  Judge  Chohan  to  conclude
    that he could attach no weight to the letter from  Mr  Tefere  Gesifata
    Belay.  As Judge Chohan noted, when one stands back and  considers  the
    appellant's claim and the OLF letter, they do seem like  two  different
    claims.  Insofar as the appellant relied upon the letter from Mr Tefere
    Gesifata Belay to support her claim to have been involved in sur  place
    activities, Judge Chohan was not prepared to attach any weight  to  the
    letter, and the appellant could gain no support  for  her  claim.   The
    appellant had failed to establish, even to the lower standard, that she
    had engaged in sur place activities in the UK that  would  put  her  at
    risk upon return to Ethiopia.


17. In the circumstances, there is no merit to the sole ground  upon  which
    permission to appeal has been granted. It follows that  I  dismiss  the
    appeal.





DECISION


18. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chohan promulgated on 19th February 2020 stands.


    V. Mandalia                         Date     16th March 2021
    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia






