
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11969/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing under Rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 24 November 2020                  |On 01 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    h h a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Freedom Solicitors (written submissions only)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer (written submissions only)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, of Kurdish ethnicity, who was  born
    on 28 February 1992.

 3. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 June  2015  and  claimed  asylum.
    Following an interview, on 26 November  2019  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 7 February 2020, Judge Meyler dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on all grounds.  The judge did not accept the appellant's claim that he
    was at real risk of persecution from ISIS whom he had not  claimed  had
    targeted him personally.  However, the judge found that  the  appellant
    would be at real risk of indiscriminate violence contrary to Art  15(c)
    of the Qualification Directive (Council Directive  2004/83/EC)  in  his
    home area, namely in the Jalawla District in  the  Diyala  governorate.
    The judge found,  however,  that  the  appellant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to internally relocate to the IKR where, inter alia, his uncle
    lived in Zakho.  The judge also found that the appellant could obtain a
    replacement CSID from the Iraqi Embassy or  via  a  proxy.   He  could,
    therefore, safely travel from Baghdad to the IKR and live  in  the  IKR
    where he had family including his uncle, whom he found had been  joined
    by his brother and aunt in 2017.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on four
    grounds.  First, the judge made a mistake of fact since  there  was  no
    evidence before the judge that the appellant's uncle lived in Zakho  in
    the IKR.  The evidence was, rather,  that  the  appellant's  uncle  had
    taken him to Zakho where they had remained for  one  night  before  the
    appellant made his onward journey  to  the  UK.   Secondly,  the  judge
    wrongly concluded that the appellant was able to contact his family  in
    Iraq consisting of  his  uncle,  his  maternal  aunt  and  his  younger
    brother.  Thirdly, the judge failed  properly  to  apply  the  relevant
    country guidance decisions in finding that the appellant would be  able
    to obtain a replacement CSID with the Iraqi Embassy in the UK or via  a
    proxy.  Fourthly, because of the mistake of fact identified  in  ground
    1, namely that the appellant's uncle lived in the IKR,  the  judge  had
    applied the wrong factual matrix in concluding that the appellant would
    have family members in the IKR in finding that he could  reasonably  be
    expected to internally relocate to the IKR.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal  on  all  grounds.
    The appellant renewed the four grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
     In a decision dated 13 July 2020, UTJ Blundell granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal on grounds 1  and  4  but  refused  permission  on
    grounds 2 and 3.  His reasons were as follows:-

         "Having concluded that the appellant will be at risk  in  his  home
         area, Judge Meyler concluded that the appellant  could  safely  and
         reasonably relocate to Zako (or Zakho), where he could count on the
         support of his maternal uncle.  It is submitted in grounds 1 and  4
         that the judge proceeded on  a  misapprehension  of  the  facts  in
         reaching this conclusion, as  it  had  never  been  said  that  the
         appellant's uncle lived in Zako; he and the appellant merely stayed
         there as he  was  leaving  the  country.   I  have  considered  the
         interviews, the statement and the judge's reasonably legible Record
         of Proceedings.  I can find nothing to support the finding that the
         appellant's uncle lived in Zako.  As a  result,  I  consider  these
         grounds to be arguable.  If established, that complaint  is  likely
         to be material, since  the  prospects  of  relocation  to  the  IKR
         without meaningful support are negligible at best.

         Grounds 2 and 3 are unarguable, however.  Judge Meyler was entitled
         to find that the appellant was able to contact family members,  for
         the detailed reasons that she  gave.   She  was  also  entitled  to
         conclude, based upon SMO (Iraq) CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC), that  the
         appellant would be able to redocument himself in the  UK  with  the
         assistance of those family members."

 7. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, on  24  August  2020  UTJ  Rintoul
    issued directions expressing the  provisional  view  that  it  will  be
    appropriate  to  determine  the  issues  of  whether   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision involved an error of law and, if so, whether to set
    it aside,  without  a  hearing.   The  parties  were  invited  to  make
    submissions on the merits of the  appeal  and  also  on  the  issue  of
    whether the error of law issue could be determined without a hearing.

 8. On 16  September  2020,  the  appellant's  legal  representatives  made
    submissions  in  response  to  Judge   Rintoul's   directions.    Those
    submissions sought to sustain the error  of  law  argument  based  upon
    grounds 1 and 4 upon which Judge Blundell had granted  permission.   He
    also invited the Tribunal to allow the appeal but, if the Tribunal  was
    unable to remake the decision, invited the Tribunal to remit the appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing on the issue of  relocation.
    The submissions did not raise any objection to the error of  law  issue
    being determined without a hearing.

 9. On 22 September 2020, the respondent replied to the submissions in  the
    form of a  rule  24  notice.   In  those  submissions,  the  respondent
    accepted there was an error of law based upon the grant of  permission.
    At paragraph 6 there is the following:

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal in line with the  grant  of  permission.   The
         grant of permission highlights the evidence concerning the location
         of the uncle".

    The submissions go on to state that the  respondent  does  not  accept,
    given the now sustained findings of the  judge,  that  the  appeal  was
    bound to succeed despite the error of law.   The  respondent  indicates
    that it may be appropriate for a rehearing on the  internal  relocation
    issue.  The submissions raise no objection to the error  of  law  issue
    being determined without a hearing.

10. In the light of the parties' submissions summarised above  at  paras  8
    and 9, and in the absence of any objection, and having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective of determining the appeal justly and fairly, I  am
    satisfied that it is in the interests of justice to determine the error
    of law issue in this appeal without a hearing  under  rule  34  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended) and para 4 of the Amended General Pilot  Practice  Directions:
    Contingency Arrangements in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal (14 September 2020) issued by (then) Vice Senior President and
    (now) Senior President of Tribunals, the Rt. Hon. Sir  Keith  Lindblom.
    In reaching this decision I have borne in mind the judgment of  Fordham
    J in R(JCWI) v The President of UTIAC [2202] EWHC 3103 (Admin).

Discussion

11. In the light of the appellant's grounds 1 and 2, the terms of the grant
    of permission and the respondent's concession in her rule 24  reply,  I
    am satisfied that the judge made a mistake of  fact,  amounting  to  an
    error of law, in finding that the appellant's uncle lived in Zakho (see
    para 14 of the determination).  The evidence before the judge  was  not
    that the appellant's uncle lived in Zakho in the IKR, but that he  took
    him there for one night before the appellant made his onward journey to
    the UK (see para 16 of the determination).  That mistake of  fact  also
    infected the judge's finding in para 26 of his determination  that  the
    appellant's brother and aunt moved to the IKR to live with his uncle in
    2017 and that the appellant's uncle now remains in the IKR.

12. That error undermines the judge's assessment of whether  the  appellant
    can reasonably be expected to internally relocate to the IKR.  To  that
    extent, as is conceded by  the  respondent,  the  judge's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal on the basis that internal relocation to the IKR  is
    an option to the appellant is unsustainable in law and cannot stand.

13. The remainder of the judge's primary findings, however, are  unaffected
    by the error of law.  In particular, given that Judge Blundell did  not
    grant permission on grounds 2 and 3,  the  judge's  findings  that  the
    appellant can contact his family in Iraq and that he would be  able  to
    obtain  a  replacement  CSID  prior  to   returning   to   Iraq   stand
    unchallenged.  The respondent did not challenge in her rule 24 reply or
    otherwise the judge's finding that, in his  home  area,  the  appellant
    would  be  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  arising  from
    indiscriminate violence contrary to  Art  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  That finding, therefore, also stands.

Decision

14. For the above reasons, the judge's decision to dismiss the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

15. The sole ground  upon  which  the  appellant's  appeal  remains  to  be
    determined is whether his return to Iraq would breach Art  15(c).   The
    finding that he is at risk in his home area is  preserved  as  are  the
    other findings unaffected by the error of law arising from the  judge's
    mistake of fact.  The decision is to be remade on the issue of internal
    relocation to the IKR.

16. On the basis of the judge's findings  in  relation  to  an  absence  of
    personal targeting or claim that ISIS has identified  him,  his  asylum
    claim also stands as dismissed.

17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to remake at an  oral
    hearing (whether remotely or otherwise) the decision in respect of  Art
    15(c) to the extent indicated above and, although  the  appellant  does
    not appear to have relied upon Art 8 of the ECHR before the judge,  Art
    8 if relied upon at the remittal hearing.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            24 November 2020
