
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11948/2017

                                                            IA/25605/2015

                                                            IA/28899/2015

                                                            IA/28903/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 April 2018                                |On 26 April 2018                |
|                                                |                                |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     OFC
                                     CMO
                                                          CMO
                                            Appellants

                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:               Ms G. Loughran of counsel, instructed by
Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:                    Ms A. Everett, Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






1.   The 1st Appellant, who was born on [ ] 1980, is a national of  Nigeria.
    She entered the United Kingdom, as a student, on 8 September 2010 on  a
    visa which expired on 30 October 2011. The 2nd and 3rd Appellants,  who
    are twins, were born in the United Kingdom on 6 May 2011.

2.   The 1st Appellant's third child, CFCOI, was born in the United  Kingdom
    on [ ] 2013. It is the 1st Appellant's case that the 4th Appellant is a
    British citizen but this has not been accepted by the Respondent.

3.   The 1st Appellant submitted a FLR(FP) application on 16 March 2015  and
    her fourth child, MTO, was born here two days later. The basis  of  her
    application was that she was the sole carer of a British child and  she
    named the 2nd and 3rd Appellants as her dependents.

4.   Her application was refused on 1 July 2015  and  she  appealed,  naming
    the 2nd and 3rd Appellants as her dependents.  The appeal  hearing  was
    initially listed for 8 November 2016 but the 1st Appellant had  in  the
    meantime disclosed a fear of persecution in Nigeria.  The  hearing  did
    not go ahead due to hearing difficulties and  was  adjourned  until  10
    April 2017.  However, it was also adjourned on that date in  order  for
    the Respondent to consider the new matters  and  make  a  supplementary
    decision, if necessary.

5.   At a case management hearing on 5 June 2017,  the  Respondent  informed
    the 1st Appellant that she needed to make a formal asylum  application.
    The 1st Appellant was referred into the National Referral Mechanism but
    it made a negative reasonable grounds decision on 20 July 2017 and  her
    asylum claim was subsequently refused on 31 October 2017.

6.   The appeals were heard together and dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cockrill in a decision, promulgated on 10 January 2018. The  Appellants
    appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted  them  permission
    to appeal on 21 February 2018.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING
7.   Both counsel for the Appellants and the Home Office Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below. .

ERROR OF LAW DECISION
Ground One
8.   The Appellants asserted that the 1st Appellants daughters would  be  at
    risk of FGM if removed to Nigeria.  In paragraph 27 of his decision the
    First-tier  Tribunal  said  that  there  would  be  a  sufficiency   of
    protection for them there as FGM was now illegal and, even  if  it  was
    practiced in her  home  area,  they  could  re-locate  elsewhere.  This
    finding was made without any detailed consideration  of  where  it  was
    likely  that  the  Appellants  would  be  living  in  Nigeria  or   the
    psychological  evidence  relating  to  the   1st   Appellant's   likely
    deterioration in mental health, if she were to be removed to Nigeria.

9.   The grounds of appeal also submit that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
    to take into account that infanticide was practiced on  twins  in  some
    parts of Nigeria. Again the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  take
    into account where the Appellants were likely to  live  if  removed  to
    Nigeria and  the  evidence  contained  in  pages  261  to  296  of  the
    Appellant's Appeal Bundle.

10.  It is also said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  give
    adequate reasons in relation to the 1st Appellant's mental  health.  In
    paragraph 28 of his decision the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  state
    that by Dr. Thomas had provided a very helpful and valuable report  but
    did not address the fact that it was Dr. Thomas's opinion that the  1st
    Appellant was suffering from a  major  depressive  disorder  which  was
    likely to deteriorate if she were to be removed to Nigeria.

11.  As a consequence, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to  take
    into account relevant evidence when reaching his decision.

Ground Two
12.  It is the 1st Appellant's case that  she  will  be  at  risk  of  being
    trafficked if removed to Nigeria.  The 1st Appellant  does  not  assert
    that she was trafficked into the United Kingdom and the  evidence  does
    not indicate that she was trafficked within the United Kingdom. The 1st
    Applicant had sex with S because she needed accommodation but this does
    not amount to sexual exploitation for the purposes of section 3 of  the
    Modern Slavery Act 2015 and  she  has  not  established  that  she  was
    exploited for any other purpose contained in section 2(1) of  the  Act.
    In addition, she has not established that S arranged or facilitated her
    travel within the United Kingdom for purposes of section  2(3)  of  the
    Act.

13.  Counsel for the Appellant sought  to  rely  on  HD  (Trafficked  women)
    Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 00454 (IAC) but the ratio in that case is  based
    on a woman returning to Nigeria having previously  been  trafficked  to
    the United Kingdom. The factors counsel seeks to rely  upon  are  those
    which indicated an enhanced risk of trafficking when a woman  has  been
    previously trafficked. Therefore, the fact that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge did not refer to this country guidance case did not amount to  an
    error of law.

Ground Three
14.  In paragraph 30 of his decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cockrill
    dealt with the question of internal  flight  very  briefly.  He  merely
    stated that the 1st Appellant "could find, as I see it, a place  within
    Nigeria, which I have already stressed is extremely populace, where she
    and the children can settle and do  so  in  safety".  The  question  of
    whether they could live safely in an area other than her home area  was
    just one aspect of the issue of whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    the 1st Appellant to have to relocate  within  Nigeria  with  her  four
    daughters. The fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  address
    the totality of the test does amount to an error of law in the  context
    of him having found that she is a lone parent who  would  be  returning
    with four young children.

Ground Four
15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to take into account  relevant
    evidence before concluding in paragraph 33 that the 1st  Appellant  did
    have family in Nigerian to whom  she  can  turn  for  some  measure  of
    support and assistance. In  particular,  he  neglected  to  review  the
    evidence as to the 1st Appellant's contact with her remaining relatives
    or take into account that she said in  paragraph  122  of  her  witness
    statement her sister does call her from Nigeria but that it is  usually
    to ask her for money.  In paragraph 124 she also said that she was  not
    on good terms with her mother and sister because they were disappointed
    that she was not employed in the United Kingdom  and  able  to  provide
    them with financial support.

Ground Five
15.  The manner in which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dealt  with  the
    question of  whether  there  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  1st
    Appellant's re-integration into the community in Nigeria were also very
    perfunctory.   In  particular,  he  did  not  follow  the  guidance  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Kamara  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    where Lord Justice Sales held at paragraph 14 that:

         "the idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in  the  society  in  the  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private and family life".


ERROR OF LAW DECISION

16.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Judge Cockrill did err in  law
    in his decision.

    (1)  The Appellants' appeals are allowed.


    (2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill's decision is set aside.


    (3)  The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
         hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Cockrill.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 19 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


