
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11853/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 March 2018                              |On 12 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     J M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Cole, Counsel, instructed by SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chapman (the judge), promulgated on  15  December  2017,
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  of
    1 November 2017, which in turn refused his protection and human  rights
    claims.  The Appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe, essentially claimed that
    he had been actively involved with the MDC and was at risk from ZANU-PF
    as a result.  He asserted that he had been abducted and ill-treated  in
    the past and that this would occur if returned to Zimbabwe.

The judge's decision in summary

 2. Between [48] and [56], the judge  makes  numerous  adverse  credibility
    findings against the Appellant.  In summary, he find that the Appellant
    had not been involved with the MDC,  had  not  been  abducted  or  ill-
    treated, and was not at risk on return to Zimbabwe.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. The fairly succinct grounds of appeal are in effect  limited  to  three
    points.  First, that the judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of  medical
    evidence.  Second, that the judge erred in relation  to  the  dates  on
    which the Appellant was allegedly detained by ZANU-PF.  Third, that  he
    erred in respect of the conclusion that the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    mention at an earlier stage his work as a model.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on
    30 January 2018.

The hearing before me

 5. The Appellant attended the hearing.  Having given  an  introduction,  I
    then ascertained that I had all relevant papers before me  including  a
    new bundle of documents  submitted  under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's Procedure Rules.

 6. Mr Cole relied on the grounds, quite properly acknowledging  that  they
    were somewhat restricted in their scope.  In respect of the Appellant's
    claim to have been a model in Zimbabwe I was referred to  [53]  of  the
    judge's decision.  The Appellant had in fact stated that he had been  a
    model in his screening interview.  This evidence had been  referred  to
    by the interviewing officer in the substantive  asylum  interview.   In
    this regard, there an error on the judge's  part.   Mr  Cole  submitted
    that this was a material error.  Indeed,  he  suggested  that  this  of
    itself was sufficient to render the whole of the decision unsound.

 7. It was submitted that the Appellant's position as a  model  would  have
    stood him out, creating a greater adverse risk  profile,  both  in  the
    past and on return.  It was suggested that being a model might increase
    the risk on return in the same way as being a teacher would  (in  light
    of  the  country  guidance  decision  in  CM  (EM   country   guidance;
    disclosure) Zimabawe CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC).  Mr Cole noted  that  the
    Appellant had also mentioned his work as a model at  paragraph  6.2  of
    his witness  statement  (page  26  of  the  Appellant's  bundle).   The
    connection between the work as a model and  risk  on  return  had  been
    stated in Mr Cole's skeleton argument as well.

 8. Turning to the issue of the medical evidence, Mr  Cole  submitted  that
    the judge's inference that the Appellant had been in detention when the
    report was allegedly written was not a strong one.  It  might  be  that
    the  judge  or  the  Appellant  had  been  calculating   time   periods
    inclusively, having regard to the start and end dates  of  the  claimed
    detention.  It was unclear why the judge had stated  that  the  medical
    evidence could have been consistent with  the  Appellant  being  robbed
    rather than assaulted in the manner put forward in his claim.

 9. Mr Clarke submitted that the grounds of appeal were indeed limited  and
    there were a number of unchallenged findings by the judge.  In  respect
    of the model issue it was submitted that the judge had looked  at  this
    point in light of how the Appellant  had  put  his  own  case.   I  was
    referred to  [54]  of  the  decision.   It  was  said  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to suggest that risk categories  in  the  country
    guidance case of CM could be expanded to include models.  The judge was
    entitled to find that even if the Appellant had been a model  it  would
    make no difference to the issue of risk on return.

10. In respect of the  medical  evidence,  Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the
    judge's findings were open to him and were certainly not perverse.

11. In respect of the alleged inconsistency  on  the  dates  on  which  the
    Appellant claims to have been abducted  by  ZANU-PF,  there  was  clear
    inconsistency in the Appellant's own evidence,  having  regard  to  the
    asylum interview  and  the  witness  statement.   Indeed,  the  grounds
    themselves appeared to be wrong  in  stating  that  the  Appellant  had
    claimed to have been abducted in April 2012.

Decision on error of law

12. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are
    no material errors of law in the  judge's  decision  when  it  is  read
    sensibly and as a  whole.   My  reasons  for  this  conclusion  are  as
    follows.

13. I note firstly that a large number of adverse credibility findings have
    not been challenged by the Appellant.  Without  setting  these  out  in
    detail, they are contained in [48](1), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8),
    [51]-[52], and [55].  All of these findings were clearly  open  to  the
    judge.  When assessing the merit of the alleged errors I bear  in  mind
    the overall number and nature of the unchallenged findings.

14.   Dealing   with   the   inconsistency   on   the   claimed   date   of
    detention/abduction by ZANU-PF, I note  that  at  question  88  of  the
    substantive asylum interview the Appellant  claimed  this  occurred  in
    June 2012.  By contrast, in the witness statement at  page  27  of  the
    Appellant's  bundle  he  makes  reference  to  having   himself   first
    erroneously stated that he was detained in April 2012, then seeking  to
    clarify and correct this by saying that it was in fact  May  2012.   On
    any view, the judge was entitled to find  that  there  was  a  material
    inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence on this  core  issue  of  his
    claim.  Therefore this ground of challenge is misconceived.

15. Turning to the medical evidence, in my view, the judge was entitled  to
    find, based on  the  evidence  as  a  whole  and  perfectly  reasonable
    inferences drawn therefrom, that the  Appellant's  claim  involved  him
    being in detention in October  2012,  that  being  the  time  when  the
    medical report appears to have been produced (see [50]).  The judge was
    faced with inconsistent evidence from the Appellant even as to when the
    detention began (April, May, or June 2012).  The Appellant had  claimed
    to have been in detention for a period of some five months.  I  see  no
    evidence from the Appellant as to how he was calculating the length  of
    detention; whether it was inclusive  or  exclusive  of  any  particular
    month.  Mr Cole  has  offered  a  suggestion  which  would  favour  the
    Appellant's challenge, but that is, with respect, somewhat  beside  the
    point.  The judge was entitled to draw inferences  as  best  he  could,
    based on the evidence before him: that is precisely what he did.

16. It follows from what I have just said that the judge was also  entitled
    to find that the date of the medical report was inconsistent  with  the
    Appellant's claim.

17. Further, the judge was entitled to have regard to  the  fact  that  the
    medical report did not mention the Appellant having been  in  detention
    and/or any injuries consistent with the alleged  sexual  violence.   He
    was entitled to find that the  contents  of  the  medical  report  were
    consistent with, for example, a violent robbery.  When this last  point
    is seen in light of the evidence as a  whole,  there  is  no  error  in
    respect of the treatment of the evidence.

18. I turn finally to the issue of the  Appellant's  work  as  a  model  in
    Zimbabwe.  It is a fact that the Appellant did mention  having  been  a
    model at question 1.14 of the screening interview and  in  his  witness
    statement at paragraph 6.2.  It is also the case that the  interviewing
    officer referred to the modelling work at question  21  of  the  asylum
    interview.  In this regard, what the judge says in the second  sentence
    of [53] is factually erroneous.  However, in my view,  this  is  not  a
    material error, having regard to the decision as a whole.

19. I say this for two reasons.  First, having regard  to  what  the  judge
    says in the rest of [53] and then in [54], I find that  the  judge  was
    also placing emphasis on his view that the Appellant  had  not  himself
    put forward the fact of his  modelling  work  as  being  a  significant
    element of his claim both in respect of past events  and  future  risk.
    The judge was entitled to find that nothing about  the  modelling  work
    was said at all in the Appellant's  first  written  statement.   Having
    looked at the asylum interview for myself, I note that at questions 13-
    14, 125, 129, and 130, there was ample opportunity for the Appellant to
    have raised this particular factor as being of importance,  but  failed
    to do so.  The judge was entitled to find in [54]  that  the  Appellant
    had not suggested that he was recognised when abducted and detained nor
    was he identified as being someone of a higher profile  when  allegedly
    treated in hospital or in the letter from the MDC.

20. With reference to the skeleton argument, at page 8 of  the  Appellant's
    bundle I note that the Appellant's work as a model is  referred  to  in
    the context of internal relocation in Zimbabwe.  That point was by  way
    of a submission made to the judge in writing.   However,  it  does  not
    materially undermine the judge's overall findings on the evidence  that
    the  Appellant  himself  did  not  regard  the   modelling   as   being
    particularly significant as to what he alleged to have occurred to  him
    in the past.

21. Second, I agree with Mr Clarke that the judge  was  fully  entitled  to
    conclude at the end of [53] that the modelling  issue  would  not  have
    enhanced any risk on return.  As I read that particular sentence, it is
    likely that the judge was effectively regarding  this  as  an  "in  any
    event" point; in other words, even if the Appellant had been  a  model,
    in light of the evidence as a whole this would have made no  difference
    to the issue of risk.  I reject any suggestion that the  enhanced  risk
    categories in the country  guidance  decision  of  CM  does,  or  could
    possibly, include models. The submission to the contrary was, I have to
    say, somewhat ambitious.

22. In light of the above there are no material errors of law here and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 9 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 9 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
