
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/11013/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st June 2019                    |On 12th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DISTRICT JUDGE MCGINTY
                  SITTING AS A DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE


                                   Between

                                   mr a.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Lowis of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wyman promulgated on 24th April 2019 following a hearing
    at  Hatton  Cross  on  27th  March  2019  at  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's asylum and human rights claims.

 2. the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  a  direction  regarding  anonymity
    under  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber Rules 2014 and given the nature  of  the
    issues in this case is similarly make an  anonymity  order.  Unless  or
    until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise the  Appellant  is  granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall  identify  him  either
    directly or indirectly or any member of  his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and the Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant in this case is a citizen of Iraq who comes  from  Kirkuk
    and is of Kurdish ethnicity.  His case was that his father was a member
    of the Ba'ath Party and is said to have been a sergeant and  commander.
    His case is that he cannot return  to  Iraq  because  of  his  father's
    association with Ba'ath Party and that he will be targeted due  to  his
    father's involvement  and  as  a  result,  his  own  imputed  political
    opinion.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepting that it was  possible
    that the Appellant's father may have been a low  level  member  of  the
    Ba'ath Party, but did not accept the Appellant's father was a commander
    of the Ba'ath Party as claimed.

 4. The judge then went on to discuss the country guidance as given in  the
    Upper  Tribunal  version  of  AA  [2015]  UKUT  00544  as  subsequently
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal, in respect of the  Article  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive considerations as to whether  there  was  a
    state of internal armed conflict in various areas of Iraq such  as  any
    civilian returned there, solely on account of his or her presence faces
    a real risk of being subjected  indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to
    serious harm within the  scope  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   At
    paragraph 87 of the judgment, Kirkuk  was  said  to  be  one  of  those
    contested areas mentioned in the country guidance.

 5. However at [88] the judge went on to state:

         "Since the reasons for refusal letter Daesh had not lost all of the
         territory  they  held  within  Iraq  and  therefore  the   security
         situation in Kirkuk  no  longer  meets  the  threshold  of  Article
         15(c)".

    It was therefore found that there is no risk of indiscriminate violence
    in northern Iraq, the Appellant was no longer at risk from ISIS and the
    Appellant did not qualify for humanitarian protection.

 6. The judge went on to find the  Appellant  was  not  at  risk  from  his
    father's limited role with the Ba'ath Party and then went  on  to  find
    that the Appellant could obtain his CSID from his mother in Turkey  and
    then went on to consider whether or not  the  Appellant  could  support
    himself back in Kurdistan, as soon as he obtained his CSID.   That  was
    dealt with between paragraphs 103 and 106 of the  judgment.  The  judge
    said the Appellant did have a sister who lived in Irbil  and  that  the
    case of AAH states that cultural norms  would  require  the  family  to
    accommodate an individual.  The judge found that  the  Appellant  could
    live a relatively life which would not be unduly harsh.

 7. The judge found that the Appellant had not provided  any  letters  from
    his sister explaining that  she  could  not  accommodate  him,  whether
    because there is no room in the house or  that  her  family  could  not
    afford to do so and he said there was no explanation as to the lack  of
    evidence provided.

 8. The judge went on to find  that  assuming  he  did  have  a  CSID,  the
    Appellant would be able to obtain work and  no  doubt  use  his  skills
    including language skills he obtained from his time in the UK and  that
    he found that the  Appellant  would  have  the  ability  to  return  to
    Kurdistan and live with his family, namely his sister and therefore did
    not  qualify  for  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or  Human  Rights
    protection.

 9. The Appellant now seeks to appeal that decision for the reasons set out
    within the Grounds of Appeal drafted by Counsel on 5th May 2019.  I  am
    most grateful to both legal  representatives  for  their  very  helpful
    submissions in respect of this case.  I am also grateful  to  Ms  Lowis
    and also her skeleton argument.  It is helpful if Counsel has  gone  to
    the trouble of drafting a skeleton  argument  so  the  judge  knows  in
    advance what is being argued and also that I do bear in  my  mind  that
    this does take time and effort and I am appreciative of how much effort
    goes into it.

10. I note that permission to appeal in this case had been granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan on 28th May 2019.  In this case Mr Bramble
    on behalf of the Home Office concedes that  in  respect  of  the  first
    Ground of Appeal that the judge erred in his approach  to  the  country
    guidance regarding Article 15(c) risk in the Appellant's home  area  of
    Kirkuk, but he does not concede that this  is  material.   Mr  Bramble,
    however, argues that the fact that even if the judge wrongly  concluded
    that the country guidance could be departed from the way that  he  did,
    the fact that the Appellant has a sister within the IKR  with  whom  he
    can live and that he will be able to obtain employment based  upon  the
    judge's findings means that any error based upon the  judge's  approach
    to the Article 15(c) risk in Kirkuk is not material.

11. The second Ground of Appeal argues that the  judge  took  an  incorrect
    approach in the assessment  of  support  available  for  the  Appellant
    within the IKR.

12. In respect of the first ground.  As  I  stated  the  judge  noted  that
    Kirkuk was one of the contested areas as far as  the  country  guidance
    was concerned at paragraph 87 of the judgment.  But  then  at  [88]  he
    went  on  to  say  that  both  the  security  situation   had   changed
    significantly since April 2015 by the date of the decision  letter  and
    that thereafter Daesh had now lost all of the territory that they  held
    within Iraq and therefore the security situation in  Kirkuk  no  longer
    met the threshold of Article 15(c).

13. As Ms Lowis notes in the skeleton argument the Court of Appeal  in  the
    case of SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 in the  judgment  of  Lord
    Justice Stanley Burton paragraphs 46 and 47 stated

         "The system of country guidance determinations enables  appropriate
         resources in terms of the representations of  the  parties  to  the
         country guidance  appeal,  expert  and  factual  evidence  and  the
         personnel  and  time  of  the  Tribunal  to  be  applied   to   the
         determination of conditions in and therefore the  risks  of  return
         for persons such as the Appellants in the country  guidance  appeal
         to the country in question.  The procedure is aimed at arriving  at
         a reliable (in the sense of accurate) determination.

         It is for these reasons as well as the desirability of  consistency
         the decision makers and  Tribunal  judges  were  required  to  take
         country guidance determinations into account and follow them unless
         very strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence  are  adduced
         justifying their not doing so".

14. Although in that regard the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  stated  that
    the security situation has now changed since the country guidance case,
    what he actually fails to set out is actually any evidence  to  support
    those conclusions.  I do not consider that is something that the  judge
    can simply state that by means of his own judicial knowledge and has to
    consider evidence actually before him in that regard and as to  whether
    it is sufficient to  indicate  that  the  country  guidance  should  be
    departed from.  It is also argued  by  the  Appellant  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account  objective  evidence  referred  to  in  the
    Appellant's own skeleton argument including the 2017 Iraq Human  Rights
    Report, the US Department of State and  2017/2018  Annual  Report  Iraq
    from Amnesty International which was said to support an assertion  that
    remained a risk of  breach  of  Article  15(c)  due  to  indiscriminate
    violence in Kirkuk

15. Within paragraph 7 of the Grounds of Appeal it is said  that  the  only
    evidence departing from country guidance was the Respondent's own  CPIN
    dated March 2017 but that was the Respondent's own assessment that  the
    situation in Kirkuk no longer met the threshold.  It seemed  the  judge
    has not even referred to that  as  a  reason  for  departing  from  the
    country guidance.  Clearly the basis upon which the judge has  departed
    from country guidance has not been adequately explained.  The  question
    as to whether or not that  error  is  material,  as  Mr  Bramble  quite
    rightly points out, is dependent on ground 2  as  to  whether  or  not,
    irrespective of the security situation in Kirkuk, the  Appellant  could
    safely  and  without  undue  hardship  internally  relocate  to   Irbil
    particularly with his sister.

16. In that regard both parties referred me to paragraphs 36 to 41  of  the
    judgment of the First-tier Tribunal Judge where he summarised parts  of
    the head note in the case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -  internal  relocation)
    Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 which gave guidance  as  to  whether  or  not
    relocation to the IKR of an Iraqi Kurd who was not from the IKR will be
    unduly harsh.

17. At paragraph 40 Judge Wyman stated that

         "If the Appellant has family members living in  the  IKR,  cultural
         norms would require  that  family  to  accommodate  him.   In  such
         circumstances, the  Appellant  would  in  general  have  sufficient
         assistance from the family to lead a 'relatively normal life' which
         will not be unduly harsh".

18. However, the judge has not actually read into his judgment the entirety
    of paragraph 8 of the headnote, because that headnote went on to  state
    "it is nevertheless important for  decision  makers  to  determine  the
    extent of any systems provided by P's family on a case by case  basis".



19. In this case as I said when the judge then  went  on  to  consider  the
    question of the sister and  the  Appellant's  ability  to  relocate  to
    Irbil, he started at paragraph 103 of the judgment and found  that  the
    Appellant's sister lives in Irbil and that based on  the  case  of  AAH
    cultural norms will require the family to accommodate an individual and
    that that would mean that a person would lead a relatively normal  life
    which will not be unduly harsh. The Judge found the Appellant  had  not
    provided any letter from his  sister  explaining  that  she  could  not
    accommodate him, whether because there is no room in the house  or  the
    family cannot afford to do so and said there was no explanation  as  to
    the lack of such evidence being provided.

20. What is argued by the Appellant is that at paragraph 63 of the judgment
    when setting out the evidence the First-tier Tribunal Judge had stated

         "Mr A confirmed  his  sister  remains  living  in  Irbil.   She  is
         married.  She has not had any  problems  living  in  Irbil.   Mr  A
         explained that when women get married their tie  from  their  birth
         family is disconnected.  This  is  why  she  has  had  no  problems
         relating to their father. ... It is different for a son,  as  males
         inherit problems from their father".

21. What Ms Lowis argues is that if one looks at this case  on  a  case  by
    case basis as required by paragraph 8  of  the  head  note  on  AAH  to
    determine whether or not family assistance is likely  to  be  provided,
    the Appellant in this case had  given  evidence  that  when  women  get
    married their tie from their birth family is disconnected so  that  she
    argues the Appellant would not be in a position simply to go  and  live
    with his birth family and his sister back in Irbil.

22. Mr Bramble argues that the reference to the tie  to  the  birth  family
    being disconnected does not mean they were no  longer  in  contact  but
    simply that responsibility for the sister then passed  from  the  birth
    family to the husband and his family upon marriage.

23. Ms Lowis in  her  skeleton  argument  says  that  the  reason  why  the
    Appellant was unable to produce a statement from his  sister  was  that
    they were no longer in contact following her marriage.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  has  not  actually  considered  what  the  Appellant's
    evidence in that regard regarding the tie to  the  birth  family  being
    disconnected, as to whether that meant that he was no longer in contact
    with her.

24. Mr Bramble put a different interpretation upon that evidence but either
    way the judge has not considered that evidence as to whether or not the
    Appellant could be accommodated  by  his  sister  and  the  Appellant's
    evidence that the tie to his sister was disconnected upon her marriage.
     The judge has not taken account of the Appellant's  evidence  in  that
    regard and has therefore might have failed to take account of  relevant
    evidence when determining that issue.

25. Criticism is also made by Ms Lowis of the  judge's  findings  regarding
    the Appellant's ability to obtain employment in the KRG,  and  in  that
    regard, she also refers me to paragraph 10 of  the  head  note  of  AAH
    where it is said that

         "Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed on a case-
         by-case basis taking the following matters into account:

          i) Gender.  Lone women are very unlikely to  be  able  to  secure
             legitimate employment;

         ii) the employment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is 70%;

        iii) P cannot work without a CSID;

         iv) patronage and nepotism continue to  be  important  factors  in
             securing employment.  A returnee with  family  connections  to
             the region will have a significant advantage in that he  would
             ordinarily be  able  to  call  upon  those  contacts  to  make
             introductions to perspective employers and to vouch for him;

          v) skills, education and experience.  Unskilled  workers  are  at
             the greatest disadvantage with a decline in  the  construction
             industry reducing the number of labouring jobs available;

         vi) if P is from an area with marked association with  ISIL,  that
             may deter respective employers."

26. Although Ms Lowis does not say that this is a checklist  and  that  the
    judge has to consider every single factor, what she does argue is  that
    the case has to be assessed  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  taking  those
    matters into account where relevant. which indicates gender  would  not
    be relevant and or could get a CSID.  What she does  say  is  that  the
    judge has not taken account of the unemployment rate at 70% in the  IKR
    or the fact that the Appellant was coming from Kirkuk an  area  with  a
    marked association with ISIL.  Those factors seemingly  have  not  been
    considered by the judge. There are therefore also  errors  in  the  way
    that internal relocation was dealt with. That does  mean  that  overall
    the errors are material.

27. In those circumstances I find that the decision does  contain  material
    errors such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  should
    be set aside in its entirety and the matter remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman.



Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside.  The matter is remitted back to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for rehearing de novo for any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
than First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman.

The Tribunal does make an anonymity order in this case.  Unless or  until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 7th July 2019
DJ McGinty
District Judge McGinty
Sitting as a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
