
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11118/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2019                               |On 1 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                    [R A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smyth, Solicitor, Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He was born  on  1  January
    2004.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection dated 5 September 2018.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 8 November 2018, Judge  Paul  (the  judge)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  He did not find him to be a truthful
    witness regarding events in Afghanistan.

 4. There were four grounds which I will address in turn:

      i) Failure to  take  account  of  relevant  matters  and/or  making  a
         material misdirection of law  on  a  material  matter  -  incorrect
         approach to assessment of credibility.

         The grounds claim the judge identified the issue of the appellant's
         evidence concerning contact with his family as determinative of the
         entire application.  He decided that  the  appellant's  account  of
         losing contact with his family was not credible and as a result the
         entire account was not credible.

     ii)  Failure  to  make  findings  on  material  matters:   humanitarian
         protection.

         The grounds claim that even if the appellant was found  not  to  be
         credible on the specific facts of his asylum claim, given he was an
         Afghan from Baghlan province, the issue of humanitarian  protection
         in terms of Article 15(c) should have been considered by the judge.
          Even if the finding that the appellant would be  accompanied  upon
         return remained undisturbed, the grounds claim that  an  assessment
         of the risk  the  appellant  faced  in  his  home  area  was  still
         required.

    iii) Making irrational/unsustainable findings.

         Ground (i) considered the judge's general approach to  credibility.
         This ground claims that the judge erred further in relation to  his
         specific findings concerning  the  appellant's  contact  with  this
         family.  The complaint is with regard to the  judge's  two  general
         assumptions that it is claimed impacted  on  his  approach  to  the
         evidence.  At [22] he said "It is almost impossible to imagine  how
         a child could be sent across some of the most  dangerous  parts  of
         the world without very careful monitoring."  Further, at  [24]  the
         judge said "In my view it is inconceivable that once  that  contact
         had been made (with a family), they would have been broken off  and
         would not have continued."  The ground claims that this approach by
         the judge showed a failure of imagination on his  part  which  made
         the statements unsustainable.  It is claimed that whilst the  judge
         was entitled  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  was  giving  a
         truthful account,  he  approached  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
         contact with his family from a starting point  of  scepticism,  not
         backed up by objective evidence which had infected his approach.

     iv) Procedural error: failing to have regard to judicial guidelines  on
         vulnerable witnesses.

         The judge mentioned the guidelines but the ground  claims  that  he
         showed a lack of regard for them.

 5. Judge Andrew granted permission on 22 February 2019.   She  said  inter
    alia as follows:

         "3.  I also find there are errors of law in the  decision.   As  to
             ground 1, the judge does not appear in the  decision  to  have
             made findings of fact in relation to  the  appellant's  claim.
             What he has done is concentrate on one aspect of the claim and
             not gone on to make any further findings.  No consideration is
             given to the appellant's return to Kabul, bearing in  mind  he
             continues to be  a  minor,  or  Article  15(c).   (Ground  2).
             Further, the judge does not appear to have considered  any  of
             the background information in  relation  to  Afghanistan.   In
             addition to this although the judge refers  to  guidelines  in
             dealing with a  vulnerable  witness  it  appears  he  has  not
             considered that the appellant may have had  some  difficulties
             with interpretation (see paragraphs 8 and  21)  and  that  the
             judge did not take these difficulties into account when making
             his findings."

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Melvin conceded the error of law as contained in the grounds and the
    grant of permission to appeal.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. I find that the grounds are made out.  There  is  no  need  for  me  to
    repeat them here.  Suffice to say briefly that having referred  to  the
    guidelines with regard to children, the judge failed to have regard  to
    them in making his adverse credibility  findings,  in  particular  with
    regard to the obvious interpretation problems.  Further, the judge  was
    obliged and failed to make findings  with  regard  to  the  appellant's
    claim set against the background evidence and  case  law.   There  also
    remained the issue of Article 15(c) and AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan
    CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC).

Notice of Decision

 9. The judge materially erred.  His decision is  set  aside  and  will  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal following a de novo hearing.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 29 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
