
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11390/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                    SAMA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant is a divorced woman and an Egyptian citizen  born  on  14
    April 1988.  She entered the United Kingdom on 24  November  2016  with
    entry clearance as a visitor accompanied by her children.  She made  an
    application for asylum  on  5  December  2016.   That  application  was
    refused by the Respondent on 18 October  2017.   Judge  Holmes  sat  at
    Manchester on 23 July 2018 and dismissed the appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Mailer on  13  June  2019  on
    three grounds.

 3. Firstly, in assessing the Appellant's credibility  the  Judge  arguably
    did  not  consider  the  Respondent's  Asylum  Policy  Instruction   on
    Assessing Credibility and Refugee Status Version  9.0  published  on  6
    January 2015 especially [7.8] ("the Policy").

 4. Secondly, the Judge had not given adequate consideration to the medical
    evidence and misapplied Mibanga v Secretary of State  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    367.

 5. Thirdly, the Judge gave no reasoned findings on summonses issued by the
    Egyptian  Anti-Terrorisim  Section  which  showed  an  ongoing  adverse
    interest by the authorities.

The Judgement

 6. Regarding Ground 1, Mr Wood noted that the Judge at [32] stated:-

         "Mr Wood relied upon the submissions set  out  in  the  appellant's
         skeleton  argument  and  in  particular  those  addressed  to   the
         Secretary  of  State's  asylum  policy  instruction  on   assessing
         credibility."

 7. Mr Wood asserted that that simple  sentence  does  not  show  that  the
    policy was applied.

 8. The Policy states at [7.8]:-

         "Gender-based harm such as rape, sexual assault, domestic violence,
         and the prospect of forced marriage, female genital  mutilation  or
         threats of honour crimes are unlikely to have documentary  evidence
         associated with them.  Greater reliance will therefore need  to  be
         placed on oral testimony and consideration of the  benefit  of  the
         doubt.  The shame and trauma that a person  has  experienced  as  a
         result  of  gender-based  violence  may  however  result  in  their
         evidence being less than complete, coherent or consistent.  It  may
         also mean that they delay disclosure."

 9. Mrs Aboni asserted that this Ground is simply a disagreement  with  the
    findings of the Judge.  The Policy was referred to in the decision.

10. Regarding Ground 2, Mr Wood noted that the Judge stated at [17]:-

         "As to the appellant's physical and psychological  condition  there
         is before me no medical evidence, in the sense of an expert opinion
         carrying the safeguards prescribed by the IAC Practice Direction on
         expert witnesses.  There are some documents  before  me  which  are
         referred to  in  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  as  'medical
         evidence', but I find these to be of very limited scope.  At  pages
         9 and 10 there are letters written by a GP in June and  July  2017,
         apparently issued in connection with the making of arrangements for
         the children's  education.   In  these  letters  the  appellant  is
         described as suffering from  depression  along  with  (unspecified)
         mental and physical health conditions.  The July letter mentions 'a
         burn in her lower legs that is still causing pain when she  walks'.
         The same letter also suggests that she finds it difficult  to  walk
         for more than approximately 50 yards 'due to her physical  health',
         but does not explicitly  connect  this  disability  with  the  burn
         injury, nor specify whether the GP considers this to be a permanent
         or a temporary disability...There is a note that states 'burnt with
         hot oil on lower legs' but there  is  no  mention  of  any  visible
         scarring".

11. In [18] the Judge continues:-

         "Before I leave the subject of medical evidence, I make two further
         observations.  Firstly, the appellant's account given in  her  Home
         Office interviews did not refer to her having received any  medical
         treatment in Egypt for the injures allegedly sustained  during  her
         detentions, but I note that her witness statement at  paragraph  13
         states that after her  first  release  she  'went  to  get  medical
         treatment'."

12. Mrs Aboni submitted that [17 and 18] showed that the  Judge  noted  the
    evidence and was entitled to reject the opinion as the author  did  not
    have relevant expertise.

13. Regarding Ground 3, Mr Wood submitted that the  only  reference  within
    the decision about the summons's could be found at [27] where it says:-

         "As to the documents in the appellant's second bundle, I note  that
         whereas they are all translated, only one ...  has  a  translator's
         certificate, which is dated October 2016...  I  consider  that  the
         poor evidence of transmission and the late disclosure are  features
         which diminish the weight that I can attach to these documents...In
         the absence of any translator's certificates for all  but  the  one
         document mentioned  above,  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  other
         documents were thereafter translated  in  this  country,  but  even
         allowing a reasonable period for translation  to  take  place,  the
         subsequent delay of more than 6 months (until these documents  were
         disclosed, just 3 days before, or  in  the  case  of  some  of  the
         documents, actually at the appeal  hearing) is a striking  feature,
         and no explanation for that delay was offered to me".

14. Mr Wood noted a letter dated 19 July 2018 signed  by  the  translator's
    Head of Client Services that was submitted prior to the hearing  before
    Judge Holmes which states:-

         "I am writing to confirm that the documents in the file,  reference
         LVO/20922-2/KW, have been translated,  proofread  and  approved  by
         eSense Translations and are an exact translation  of  the  original
         copy documents  that  were  received  from  Fallon  Barton  of  the
         Immigration Advice Service on 16th July 2018..."

15. Mrs Aboni submitted  that  the  Judge  did  take  account  of  all  the
    documentary evidence.

Discussion

16. Regarding Ground 1, I am not satisfied that the reference  at  [32]  of
    the  decision  has  been  established  as  having  been  applied.   The
    Appellant had alleged she had been raped and sexually assaulted.  It is
    unclear how the Judge has considered how this may have impacted on  her
    ability to give a complete, coherent or consistent account particularly
    when the Judge did find that the background evidence confirms that such
    behaviour occurs in Egypt and refers at [21] to this  where  the  Judge
    states:-

         "Regarding the appellant's claims as to what  happened  during  her
         detentions, the respondent did not  suggest  that  vile  misconduct
         towards women, such as the appellant alleges against  the  Egyptian
         police,  would  be  inconsistent  with  any  objective   background
         evidence.  I accord due weight to this shocking fact."

17. Bearing in mind that the claim was consistent  with  what  occurs,  her
    confused account is not inconsistent with the guidance contained within
    the Policy and the Appellant is entitled to explanation as to  why  the
    Policy does not assist her.  I am satisfied  that  this  amounts  to  a
    material error of law.

18. Regarding Ground 2, whilst this  is  not  strongest  ground,  given  my
    finding on the non application of the Policy and  the  lack  of  proper
    consideration to the summonses (see below), the findings in relation to
    her burns should have been considered in  light  of  the  rest  of  the
    evidence. Accordingly, there was a material error of law.

19. Regarding Ground 3, the Judge criticised  the  translation  and  stated
    that only one document had been translated.  However, the letter of  19
    July 2018 states that all the documents had been translated,  proofread
    and approved by an approved translation service. There is no assessment
    of the contents of those documents. In my  judgment  the  treatment  of
    these documents amount to a material error of law as there has been  an
    explanation  as  to  who  has  translated  them  and  when  they   were
    translated, and the contents have not been adequately considered by the
    Judge.

20. Bearing in mind the above, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to set
    aside the decision and remit it back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    Manchester for a fresh hearing not to be heard before Judge Holmes.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
14 August 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT - FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
14 August 2019
