
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11893/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th October 2018                          |On 19th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [g m]
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegami (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    O'Hagan, promulgated on 18th  January  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 9th January 2018.   In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, and was born on  [~]  1968.
    He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  18th  October
    2016,  refusing  his  claim  to  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection,
    pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that  he  was  raised  in  the
    Orthodox Islamic tradition of his country, but his  difficulties  began
    in February 2013, when he adopted a girl called [A], who  was  born  on
    27th July 2012, and was then about 7 months old.  She was now  aged  5.
    His family disapproved of the adoption.  They thought this was contrary
    to the teachings of Islam.  Following an attack on him  and  his  wife,
    the Appellant took his brothers to the Shiraz Family Court.  The  judge
    told the Appellant he should marry [A].  After this, the Appellant  was
    disillusioned with  Islam.   About  this  time  he  was  introduced  to
    Christianity.  He and his wife converted to Christianity in  May  2015.
    They began to attend a house church in August 2015.  He attended  three
    times at monthly intervals.  The church was then raided in March  2016,
    and some members were arrested and detained.   The  Appellant  and  his
    wife fled Iran.

 4. In the United Kingdom,  the  Appellant  began  to  attend  the  Walsall
    Christian Centre and there was evidence in this support  from  Mr  [LB]
    and Mr [JK], the senior leader at the Walsall Christian Centre and  the
    cross-cultural  community  worker  at  the  Walsall  Christian  Centre,
    respectively.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge observed how the Appellant  failed  to  mention  Christianity
    during his screening interview, and had in fact described himself as  a
    Muslim, and had only  subsequently  gone  on  to  say  that  he  was  a
    Christian (paragraph 19).  Consideration was also given by the judge to
    the Appellant's conversion to Christianity.  There was no-one from  the
    Oasis Church that the Appellant had attended.  His explanation was that
    he did not ask anyone to attend.  There were also no supporting letters
    from them.  The Appellant offered to send such evidence afterwards, but
    the judge properly declined to take it into  account,  given  that  the
    Home Office would  not  have  had  the  opportunity  to  consider  such
    evidence (paragraph 21).

 6. On the other hand, there was evidence from both Mr  [B],  and  from  Mr
    [JK] before the Tribunal.  The judge was critical of the evidence given
    from these witnesses, and this is set out at length by  the  judge  (at
    paragraphs 31 to 35).   In  particular,  the  judge's  conclusions  (at
    paragraph 66) were that the church officials had  perhaps  acted  in  a
    manner that was not becoming of them (see paragraph 66).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge, in  his  treatment  of
    the two independent witnesses, had applied the  incorrect  standard  of
    proof and placed too much weight on inconsistencies.  In  addition,  if
    regard is had to paragraph 67 of the decision, it was arguable that the
    judge  speculated  about  the  motivation  of  the   members   of   the
    congregation, who had co-signed a letter produced by Mr [K], the cross-
    cultural community worker at the Walsall Christian Centre, and if there
    was a concern about his motivation, this was a serious accusation, that
    should have been put to the witness.  Also, there appears to have  been
    a discrepancy about the number of Iranians attending the church, but if
    there was a discrepancy about this, in terms of  an  answer  that  some
    Iranians had moved away after being granted  status  in  this  country,
    this may well have been on account  of  the  change  of  accommodation,
    which  inevitably  meant  that  their  previously  Home  Office  funded
    accommodation was withdrawn, such that the criticism could not then  be
    upheld from the judge.

 9. On 19th March 2018, permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had arguably failed to address the
    fact that the Appellant was a genuine convert, and that the two  church
    witnesses have not been properly considered in terms of their evidence.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 29th October 2018, Mr Bandegani,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that there were a number of areas
    of concern because the judge had  accepted  the  core  account  of  the
    Appellant as being plausible (at paragraphs 47, 48, 50, 51, 69, 70  and
    arguably 64).  However, he had then focused on the negative  aspect  of
    the claim, in a manner  that  appeared  to  show  that  the  judge  was
    striving to refuse the appeal notwithstanding that which had been found
    in favour of  the  Appellant.   Against  this  general  submission,  Mr
    Bandegani went on to make the following three submissions.

11. First, the account given  of  how  many  Iranians  there  were  in  the
    congregation engaging in  services  was  one  that  had  been  properly
    explained (at paragraph 64) but the judge had then proceeded to  reject
    this on the basis that Mr [B] had told him of a Farsi speaking lady who
    came on a Friday evenings in  2016  to  enable  people  to  tell  their
    stories, but had neglected to mention this earlier, such that it  could
    not be said on this basis alone that the account given off the  numbers
    in attendance was to be rejected for this reason alone.   Further,  the
    judge stated that Mr [K]  had  contradicted  the  numbers  of  Iranians
    attending given by Mr [B], and when  this  had  been  put  to  him  "he
    changed his account" (paragraph 65).  This was a  serious  attack  upon
    the credibility of these two church  witnesses.   The  members  of  the
    congregation would move on.  The fact that, upon the matter  being  put
    again to Mr [K], he had corrected himself, did not mean to say that the
    evidence was for that reason unreliable.

12. Second, at paragraph 54,  the  judge  refers  to  the  threats  to  the
    Appellant and his  wife  from  his  brothers.   He  observes  that  the
    Appellant was unable to explain the discrepancy  between  his  evidence
    and his statement.  He had said that  although  his  brothers  did  not
    attack him or his family following the hearing at  the  Shirazi  Court,
    "his brothers continued to make threats, and discount at the  interview
    that they did nothing at all  post-hearing"  (paragraph  54).   It  was
    difficult to see, submitted Mr Bandegani, what was meant by  this.   An
    attack is different from a threat.  The Appellant's  account  here  was
    that they continued to threaten him, although they did not attack  him.
    Furthermore, it was not clear what account the judge is referring to in
    the interview.

13. Third, the judge had failed to refer to an important piece of  evidence
    from [ML] who had provided a headed notepaper letter of four pages,  as
    the associate pastor at the Jesus Fellowship Church,  who  stated  that
    she had actually spoken to the  Appellant  about  his  fate,  and  this
    letter, which is dated 5th August 2017, is nowhere referred to  by  the
    judge, although it appears in the bundle.

14. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that, this was a complicated case,  as
    is clear from the background evidence, which involved a threat  to  the
    Appellant on account of his having adopted  a  small  child  of  a  few
    months, which his  family  did  not  agree  with.   The  Appellant  had
    expressed disillusionment with Islam and with Iran whilst he was in his
    own country.  Mr Mills, however, stated that, "I have  to  accept  that
    the way that the judge dealt with the  witnesses  is  troubling".   The
    criticism of how many asylum seekers were  attending  the  church,  and
    whether there were six Iranians and four Kurds, or not  (see  paragraph
    65) was neither here nor there.  Importantly, however, to say  that  no
    weight whatsoever was to be attached to  what  this  witness  said,  on
    account the  difficulties  in  which  they  found  themselves  in,  was
    unsustainable.  He would have to agree that there was an error of law.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

16. This is a  case  where  the  judge  has  unfortunately  approached  the
    evidence of Mr [B] and Mr [K] in a manner that is unfortunate.  This is
    clear from what appears at paragraphs 63 to  67.   The  explanation  is
    given early on at paragraph 64 about the steps taken to enable Iranians
    in the congregation to engage in services, and it is unclear,  why  the
    reference to a Farsi speaking lady who came on a  Friday,  should  make
    that account lacking in credibility is difficult to see.

17. In the same way, after both witnesses have explained what the number of
    Iranians and other asylum seekers are in the  congregation,  the  judge
    proceeded to say that Mr [K] had "changed his account" when what he had
    done was to give an explanation,  is  a  feature  of  the  fact-finding
    process that is also unfortunate.  The church witnesses are not  people
    claiming asylum.  They have no reason to set out to mislead  the  court
    whether deliberately or inadvertently.

18. However, perhaps the most concerning  aspect  of  the  appeal  in  this
    regard, is the description of the judge of how Mr [K], who had provided
    a letter of support for the Appellant for the Tribunal, had  then  gone
    on to elicit the names  of  other  people,  who  could  attest  to  the
    Appellant going to church services, and their names are  written  below
    the letter of Mr [K] in a list.  The judge went on to say that,  "I  am
    concerned by the way in which the list was compiled".   When  this  was
    put to Mr [K] the judge recorded that, "he said that the witnesses were
    happy to confirm that the Appellant attends  church".   The  judge  had
    gone  on  to  say  that  the  witnesses  "may  well  have  felt   under
    considerable pressure to put down their names, whether they were  happy
    to do so or not".  He had then concluded that, "I do also question  the
    ethics of compiling a list of this kind by putting people on the  spot"
    (paragraph 67).

19. This amounts to an  accusation  that  the  church  witnesses  were  not
    proceeding with the best of motives in relation to  the  appeal  before
    the Tribunal.  There is no basis for this.  Another church official may
    well have simply put forward a letter signed under his or her name.  In
    this case Mr [K] chose, for reasons that he may well have been able  to
    explain, to also have the names of other people attending  the  church,
    confirming that they have seen the Appellant come to  church  services,
    and if he had gone the extra hog in doing so, this did not  necessarily
    raise an ethical question about what he  was  doing,  provided  he  was
    satisfied himself that the Appellant was a genuine convert,  which  was
    the critical issue that such church officials attend a  court  to  give
    evidence on.

20. Given that the error of law is conceded by Mr Mills, I proceed to  make
    a finding accordingly that the judge has  fallen  into  error  for  the
    reasons that have been given.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  allowed
by the Practice Statement 7.2(a) to the extent that it is remitted  back  to
a judge other than Judge O'Hagan at Birmingham CJC  at  the  next  available
opportunity.

The appeal is allowed.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th December 2018



