
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11582/2018 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2020                    |On 19 August 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                  [M N M K]

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     No submissions received

For the respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge  O'Callaghan  on  24  December  2019
         against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oliver,
         promulgated on 9 October 2019 following a hearing at  Hatton  Cross
         on 30 August 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on 4 August  1989.  His
         immigration background is not impressive. He entered the  UK  as  a
         student in September 2009 with leave until  November  2011  but  he
         stopped studying within three months of  his  arrival,  started  to
         work and overstayed his visa. He admitted  to  the  judge  that  an
         agent had arranged his visa because he  had  no  qualifications  to
         study, that he never intended to be a student or to return  to  Sri
         Lanka. When encountered in 2012 he claimed asylum. The  application
         was refused in August 2012 and the appellant breached the terms  of
         his bail and absconded. He was  subsequently  encountered  in  July
         2013 again working illegally. He gave  a  false  address,  reported
         once thereafter before absconding again. In  October  2016  he  was
         encountered yet again. This time he submitted representations which
         were refused under paragraph 353 in December  2016.  He  then  gave
         notice of appeal against  the  August  2012  decision  but  it  was
         rejected as out  of  time  in  May  2017.  In  July  2017  he  made
         representations on  the  basis  of  his  relationship  with  a  new
         partner. These were rejected in August 2017. In  October  2017  the
         appellant married his partner. She, an Indian national also without
         leave, made her own application for leave and  the  appellant  made
         his. His wife maintained that she would be at risk because she  had
         changed her religion after marriage. Her application was refused on
         an unspecified date. The appellant's  application  was  refused  in
         September 2018.

      3. His claim is that he has been  blamed  by  his  father's  political
         rival for the death of his  school  principal  in  a  car  accident
         because he and other students were angry that he  had  not  allowed
         them to re-sit their examinations. Additionally, he was wanted  for
         questioning  about  a  friend  who  had  disappeared  and  who  was
         suspected of involvement with the LTTE. Finally,  he  had  attended
         TGTE demonstrations in the UK.

      4. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver.  Following
         oral evidence from the appellant and submissions from the  parties,
         the judge dismissed the appeal.

    Covid-19 crisis

      5. The appeal was listed for hearing on 31 March  2020  following  the
         grant of permission to appeal but due to the Covid-19 pandemic  and
         need to take precautions against its spread, it was  adjourned  and
         directions were sent to the parties on 20 April  and  again  on  22
         June 2020 granting the appellant his request for  an  extension  of
         time of 28 days to comply. The parties were asked  to  present  any
         objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers and to make
         any further submissions on the error of law  issue  within  certain
         time limits.

      6. The Tribunal has received written submissions from  the  respondent
         dated 7 May 2020 in compliance  with  the  earlier  directions  but
         there has still been no response from the appellant. Given that  he
         has now had 28 additional days to comply with the April  directions
         and that there has been no further response from him, I now proceed
         to consider the matter

      7. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      8. I take into account that a full account of the facts are set out in
         the papers, that the arguments for and against the  appellant  have
         been clearly set  out  and  that  the  issues  to  be  decided  are
         straightforward and have been fully addressed  in  the  submissions
         made. There are no matters arising  from  the  papers  which  would
         require clarification and so an oral hearing would  not  be  needed
         for that purpose. I have regard to the two  opportunities  provided
         to the appellant to comply with directions issued four  months  ago
         and the delay in the resolution of this appeal which was  filed  in
         October 2018. I have regard to the importance of the matter to  the
         appellant and consider that a speedy determination of  this  matter
         is in his best interests. I am satisfied that I am able  to  fairly
         and justly deal with this matter on the papers before me and I  now
         proceed to do so.

    Submissions

      9. The respondent's submissions are prepared  on  7  May  2020  by  Ms
         Aboni. She submits that the judge  directed  himself  appropriately
         and gave adequate reasons for his finding that  the  appellant  was
         not a credible witness and was someone who had used every means  at
         his disposal to avoid return to Sri Lanka. It is submitted that the
         judge gave adequate reasons for finding that  the  appellant  would
         not be at risk on return because of any events before he  left  his
         country and that his low-level activities for the LTTE would not be
         of interest to the authorities or put him at risk of return now. It
         is pointed out that there has been no challenge to the finding that
         the appellant's sur place activities and low-level involvement with
         the TGTE were wholly opportunistic and  that  he  lacked  any  real
         commitment to the organisation. It is submitted that it was open to
         the judge to find that the appellant did not have a  profile  which
         would put him at risk on return, a finding which is consistent with
         the country  guidance.  The  Tribunal  is  asked  to  maintain  the
         decision.

     10. No submissions have been received from the appellant despite  being
         given two opportunities to comply with directions. I  am  satisfied
         that the directions were properly served  on  both  occasions  and,
         indeed, that they were received, given the request for an extension
         of time. The approval of such an extension and  further  directions
         were  also  properly  served  on  the  appellant.  Given  his  non-
         compliance, I  have  considered  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
         application for permission to appeal.

     11. Those grounds maintain that the judge made material errors of  law.
         It is submitted that the TGTE is a proscribed organisation and that
         there was no challenge to the fact that the appellant had  attended
         a number of their demonstrations in this country. It is argued that
         the fact that the appellant had joined the organisation to  enhance
         this claim did not mean that he would not be at risk on return  due
         to his involvement. It  is  argued  that  the  appellant  would  be
         perceived to be involved in a significant way in  Tamil  separatism
         and that this would place him at risk. It is argued that the  judge
         misunderstood the evidence and misapplied the burden  of  proof  by
         requiring the appellant to have provided supporting evidence. It is
         argued that the appellant's account of  having  been  arrested  and
         detained is supported by the background evidence and that the judge
         provided no sound basis for rejecting the findings of the doctor as
         to the fact that his condition would deteriorate at  the  point  of
         removal. It is submitted that  the  appellant  would  face  intense
         suffering at the point of removal and that  there  is  insufficient
         psychiatric treatment for him in Sri Lanka.

    The legal framework

     12. The judge properly took into account the law and the  tests  to  be
         applied at paragraphs 4-11 of his determination.

    Discussion and Conclusions

     13. I have considered all the evidence, the determination of the First-
         tier  Tribunal  Judge,  the  grounds   for   permission   and   the
         respondent's submissions.

     14. This is a  case  where  the  judge's  reasoning  is  criticised  as
         inadequate and he is alleged to have overlooked matters and to have
         misapplied the correct tests.

     15. Contrary to what the appellant's grounds argue, I am satisfied that
         there is nothing in the determination which even remotely  suggests
         that the judge misapplied the standard/burden of proof or  that  he
         misunderstood country guidance. It is plain that the judge directed
         himself wholly  appropriately  and  at  length  (at  4-11).  He  is
         criticised for referring to the absence of  corroborative  evidence
         but such comments were made in circumstances  where  the  appellant
         could easily have obtained supporting material.

     16. The  judge  rejected  the  claim  of  risk  due  to  any  suspected
         involvement in his school  principal's  accident  for  the  reasons
         given at paragraph 52. It was open to him to point out  that  there
         was no information at all about what happened to the  students  who
         had been to the principal's house and attacked him  and  that  over
         the ensuing ten years there had been no  further  ramifications  of
         incidents involving the appellant's father's rival and  indeed  his
         family remained in Sri Lanka.

     17. The claim concerning his friend is adequately addressed at 53  with
         the judge finding that even taken at its  highest  his  involvement
         was so low level that there would no longer be any interest in him.



     18. On the matter of  his  sur  place  activities  he  found  that  the
         appellant's involvement with the  TGTE  was  wholly  opportunistic,
         that he had no real commitment to the organisation at all and  that
         he could not be identified from photographs (at 54).  It  would  be
         the case, therefore, that the appellant's activities would be  seen
         by the Sri Lankan authorities for what they  were:  an  attempt  to
         remain in the UK rather than any serious or genuine attempt to  aid
         in the overthrow of the  government.   Any  error  in  the  judge's
         failure to consider how the appellant would  be  perceived  by  the
         authorities is therefore immaterial.

     19. The judge noted that after the incident  concerning  the  principal
         when the appellant claimed to be  wanted,  he  was  still  able  to
         travel through the normal channels to Dubai  and  back  and  indeed
         subsequently to the UK, further undermining  his  claim  to  be  of
         adverse interest (at 55).

     20. The judge also gave weight to the appellant's delayed asylum  claim
         and the many failures to make a claim when he  was  encountered  on
         several occasions (at 56).

     21. At 57 the judge considered the medical  reports  and,  contrary  to
         what the grounds argue, gave clear reasons for  why  he  gave  them
         little weight. The appellant adduced no evidence to  show  that  he
         would not be able to access medical care in  Sri  Lanka  where  his
         family remain and would be able to assist him.

     22. No challenge is made to the article 8 findings.

     23. Accordingly, it was open to the judge to dismiss the appeal and his
         determination contains no errors of law.




          Decision

     24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error
         of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.

         Anonymity

     25. I continue the anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge.

     26. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise,
         no reports of these proceedings of any form of publication  thereof
         shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant. This direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings.




    Signed


    R. Keki?


    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 17 August 2020




