
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11555/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2019                  |On 25 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                  mr m l a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Waheed, Counsel instructed by Kalam solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 28 February 1987,
    is appealing against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Cockrill promulgated on 29 August 2019 to refuse his protection and
    human rights claim.

 2. The appellant entered the UK in 2009 as a student.  However, it was not
    until 22 August 2016, following the refusal of an application for leave
    to remain as the spouse of a British citizen on 14 April 2016, that he
    applied for asylum.

 3. The appellant claims that he faces an objectively well-founded fear of
    persecution if he is returned to Bangladesh because:

      a) between 2004 and 2009 he was an active member of the Bangladesh
         Islami Chhatrashibir (BIC).  In his witness statement, the
         appellant states that he was the Finance Secretary, Secretary and
         President of BIC for a residential area of Shahjalal University of
         Science and Technology and the Organising Secretary for BIC of the
         Department of Political Studies of Shahjalal University of Science
         and Technology.  In order to corroborate this, the appellant
         submitted a letter from the current President of BIC at Shahjalal
         University in which it is stated that the appellant held the
         aforementioned positions;

      b) his father is a prominent and eminent figure in the Bangladesh
         jamaat-e-Islami (BJI) who has suffered imprisonment, and whose
         family has been harassed and attacked as a consequence of his
         prominence.  To support his claim that his family has suffered
         because of the role of his father, the appellant submitted evidence
         showing that his younger brother, who worked as a journalist, had
         been attacked, as well as a statement from his father which refers
         to the family being at risk and a statement from the President of
         the BJI Sylhet branch where reference is made to the family being
         subject to adversity and persecution because the appellant's father
         is an eminent and vocal figure.

 4. The appellant's protection and human rights claim was refused by the
    respondent on 17 September 2018.  The respondent did not accept that
    the appellant was a member of BIC or that his father was politically
    active.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, where his appeal was
    heard at Taylor House by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill ("the
    judge").

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge accepted that the appellant's father has been associated with
    BJI and has suffered arrest and imprisonment as a consequence.
    However, the judge did not accept that the appellant's family faced, or
    faces, a risk because of the father's role in BJI.  The judge reached
    this view because he found that the attack on the appellant's younger
    brother occurred because he is a journalist, not because he is the son
    of the appellant's father.  At paragraph 64 the judge stated:

         "As regards the position with the younger brother, there is a
         report in a newspaper about an incident where there was an attack.
         That has been well enough documented.  I accept that an attack took
         place, but the cause or causes of the attack are very far from
         clear.  Again, the respondent was rightly critical in my judgment
         of this assertion that it was as a result of the relationship
         between the appellant's younger brother and their father.  The
         newspaper report at face value appears to be far more suggestive
         that it was because the younger brother was a journalist.  As a
         matter of fact I accept that that was the reason for the attack and
         not anything to do necessarily with the father."

 7. With respect to the appellant's claim that he had a prominent role in
    BIC for several years up until he left Bangladesh in 2009, the judge
    stated:-

         "61. I note that the appellant contends that he was part of the
             student wing of Jamaat-e-Islami and there is some evidence on
             that issue in favour of the appellant.  However, and I stress
             this, what is very noticeable by its absence is that there
             really is not in this claim for protection any narrative that
             the appellant suffered real difficulties back in Bangladesh
             right up to 2009, when of course on his case he was associated
             with that student wing.

         62.  I recognise the point that is made properly by the appellant's
             Counsel that the political climate did alter in 2009 but the
             fact remains that for the appellant who was born in 1987 he
             was in his early 20s before he left  Bangladesh and, and I
             stress this, there really were not difficulties being suffered
             by him back in Bangladesh because of any expression of
             political opinion or perception of political opinion."

 8. At paragraph 67 of the decision the judge stated:-

             "What I do accept specifically as a fact is that the appellant
             has a general sympathy with the cause of Jamaat-e-Islami and
             its student wing, but that in and of itself is not sufficient
             in my judgment to enable the appellant to gain the
             international protection that he seeks."

Grounds of Appeal

 9. The first ground of appeal submits that the judge failed to make a
    clear finding about the appellant's involvement with BIC or explain why
    the involvement he claimed to have, as corroborated by the President of
    BIC at Shahjalal University, was rejected.

10. When developing this ground of appeal in his submissions, Mr Waheed
    made the further argument that the judge fell into error by attaching
    significance to the fact that the appellant did not suffer difficulties
    in Bangladesh up until 2009 when the objective evidence showed that the
    Awami League only came to power in 2009 and therefore there would be no
    reason why he would have suffered persecution prior to 2009.  He argued
    that what mattered, for the assessment of whether the appellant would
    face a risk, was his profile in BIC prior to leaving Bangladesh, not
    whether he faced any hostility during that period.

11. The second ground of appeal submits that the judge failed to recognise
    that the profile of the appellant's father increased the likelihood of
    the appellant facing risk.  Mr Waheed drew attention to the statements
    of three witnesses (Mr S I S, Mr A I M, and the appellant's father)
    which, he claimed, support the view that the appellant would be at risk
    because of his father but had not been considered by the judge. The
    grounds also argue that the evidence before the judge did not support
    his conclusion that the appellant's brother was victimised only because
    he was a journalist and not because of his connection to his father.

12. The third ground of appeal submits that the judge erred by drawing an
    adverse inference from the absence of documentation to support the
    appellant's claim that the authorities have been pursuing him.

13. The fourth ground of appeal submits that the judge erred by treating as
    determinative (or placing too much weight) on the delay in the
    appellant bringing the asylum claim.

14. Mr Clarke argued that the judge, applying the correct standard of
    proof, had adequately addressed the appellant's claim to have been
    involved with BIC at paragraph 61 of the decision (which is quoted
    above) and that the conclusion reached was one which was open to him
    based on the evidence.  He also argued that the absence of persecution
    prior to 2009 was relevant to whether the appellant had a profile in
    Bangladesh that would put him at risk.

15. Mr Clarke maintained that the objective evidence did not support the
    contention that the appellant would be at risk merely because of his
    father's role and that the evidence clearly supported the conclusion
    that the appellant's younger brother faced hostility because he is a
    journalist, not because of his father.  He also highlighted that the
    delay in making a claim was an important factor, to which the judge was
    entitled to give considerable weight. He also drew attention to the
    answers given by the appellant at his asylum interview which, in his
    view, demonstrated that the judge was correct to describe him as vague
    and lacking credibility in respect of the claim that the authorities
    have shown an interest in him.

Analysis

16. In my view, there are two errors in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal which, when taken together, are sufficiently significant that
    they undermine the decision, such that it will need to be set aside in
    its entirety.

17. The first error concerns the judge's assessment of the appellant's role
    in BIC prior to his leaving Bangladesh in 2009.

18. The appellant's claim, as set out in his witness statement and as set
    out in the letter from the President of BIC at Shahjalal University, is
    that between 2004 and 2009 he had a prominent public role within BIC
    including as President of a residential area.

19. It is not expressly stated in the decision whether the judge accepted
    or rejected this part of the appellant's claim.  At paragraph 67 the
    judge stated that he accepted that the appellant has "a general
    sympathy with the cause of Jamaat-e-Islami and its student wing" and
    that this, of itself, was insufficient to gain international
    protection.  However, the judge did not address, or make finding as to
    (a) whether or not the appellant had a significant and active role
    within BIC between 2004 and 2009; and (b) if he had such a role,
    whether this (as opposed to merely being a supporter of BIC) would give
    rise to risk on return.

20. The failure to make a finding of fact on whether the appellant had been
    a prominent member of BIC led to the judge, at paragraph 67, addressing
    the wrong question.  At paragraph 67 the judge found that being a
    sympathiser with BJI and BIC would not, of itself, give rise to risk;
    but the appellant's claim was not that he was merely a sympathiser, it
    was that he was a member with a leadership role.

21. The second error which undermines the decision is that the judge at
    paragraphs 61 and 62 appears to take the view that it is relevant to
    whether or not the appellant would be at risk in Bangladesh that he did
    not experience any difficulties prior to leaving the country in 2009.
    Although the judge at paragraph 62 acknowledged the political climate
    altered in 2009, he does not appear to have taken into consideration
    that it was only in 2009 that the Awami League (which is the party the
    appellant claims to be at risk from) came to power and that, therefore,
    there was no reason for the appellant to have suffered ill-treatment
    prior to 2009.  As argued by Mr Waheed, the absence of ill-treatment
    prior to 2009 does not undermine the credibility of the appellant's
    account.  Nor does it render him less likely to be at risk on return,
    if that risk arises from the role he had in the BIC prior to 2009.

22. The above described errors are, in my view, material because if the
    appellant, as he claims, had a prominent and public role within BIC
    than this, taken together with the profile of his father (as accepted
    by the judge) might have led to the judge finding that the appellant
    had an objectively well-founded fear of persecution.

23. Given that the errors of law identified relate to the assessment of the
    appellant's credibility and that credibility is a central issue in this
    appeal, having regard to paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements of
    the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and
    Upper Tribunal, I consider this an appeal which should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Notice of Decision

24. The appeal is allowed.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside on the basis that
    it contains a material error of law and the appeal is remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different judge. No
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                      |                               |
|Signed                                |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|[pic]                                 |                               |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated:  21 November 2019       |

