
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11641/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018                         |On 22 January 2019            |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Obone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Beckford, Counsel, instructed by Freedom
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal brought by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department against the decision of Judge the First tier  Tribunal  Broe
    dated 4 January 2018,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  27  October  2017  refusing   his
    protection claim. In this decision, I shall refer  to  the  parties  by
    their titles in the First tier Tribunal.

2     The appellant is a national of Iran and arrived in United  Kingdom  on
    17 September 2016 and claimed asylum. He  is  of  Kurdish  origin.  His
    claim for protection was on the basis that he feared  serious  harm  in
    Iran due to political activity which he claimed to have  undertaken  in
    support of the Kurdish political party PJAK.  He also claimed  to  have
    posted Kurdish political material,  critical  of  the  Iranian  regime,
    online in a Facebook account.

3     The appellant was interviewed in relation to his claim, including  his
    Facebook activity [SEF questions  177-185].   In  the  decision  of  27
    October 2017, the respondent disputed the appellant's account of events
    in Iran. The decision letter acknowledged at [38]  that  the  appellant
    had submitted print-outs from his Facebook  page,  containing  material
    that was supportive of PJAK, but expressed the view that the  documents
    were considered to be self-serving.

4     The appellant appealed that decision, the  matter  coming  before  the
    judge on 11 December 2017. The appellant gave evidence. The judge  gave
    reasons at [24] -[26] for finding the appellant's account of events  in
    Iran unreliable.

5     However, the judge also held as follows at [27]:

         "The appellant has nonetheless provided evidence  of  his  internet
         activity  which  has  not  been  significantly  challenged  by  the
         respondent. I accept that the documents before me are downloads  of
         posts on his Facebook page. It has not been suggested that they are
         anything but critical of the Iranian regime. I note that they  were
         all created after the appellant was released from detention in this
         country. He did not claim to have been involved in such activity in
         Iran. Against the background of my findings above I find that  this
         activity was opportunistic."


6     The judge recorded at [28] that his attention had been  drawn  to  the
    case of AB and others (Internet activity  -  state  of  evidence)  Iran
    [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC), and acknowledged that this was  not  a  country
    guidance case, but he  stated  that  he  took  the  determination  into
    account, in particular the summary, beginning  at  paragraph  466.  The
    judge also referred to paragraph 457.

7     The judge held at [30] as follows:

         "The Tribunal found that a risk could arise what  is  described  as
         the "pinch point" which occurs when a person is returned  to  Iran.
         The evidence before it was that Iranian nationals returned  without
         their passports would be questioned and could be asked  to  provide
         information enabling  the  authorities  to  gain  access  to  their
         Facebook page. They thought it "likely  that  they  will  be  asked
         about their internet activity and likely if they have any  internet
         activity for that to be exposed and if it is less  than  flattering
         of the government to lead to a real risk of persecution.""


8     The judge then set out paragraph 472 of AB and others:

         "The mere fact that a person, if extremely discrete, blogged in the
         United Kingdom would not mean they would necessarily  come  to  the
         attention of the authorities in Iran. However, if there was a lapse
         of discretion they could face hostile interrogation on return which
         might expose them to risk. The more active a person had been on the
         internet the greater the risk. It is not relevant if a  person  had
         used the internet in an opportunistic way. The authorities are  not
         concerned with a person's motivation. However  in  cases  in  which
         they have taken an interest claiming asylum is  viewed  negatively.
         This may not of itself be sufficient to lead to persecution but  it
         may enhance the risk"


    The judge then held as follows at [32]:

         "In this case I have found the appellant  to  lack  credibility.  I
         have rejected his account of events in Iran for his  departure.  He
         has nonetheless made a number of Facebook  posts  critical  of  the
         Iranian regime. That they are opportunistic does not matter. I have
         been guided by the findings in AB and must therefore conclude  that
         he would face a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  for  that
         reason."


9     At [33] the judge held the  appellant  had  made  out  his  case,  and
    allowed the appeal at [34].

10    The respondent sought permission to appeal against  that  decision  in
    grounds dated 9 January 2018 arguing, in summary, that the judge  erred
    in law in:

    (i)     failing  to  give  reasons  which  were  adequate  in  law  for
         concluding that there was a reasonable degree  of  likelihood  that
         the appellant would be perceived as anti-regime on Iran, given that
         his account of events in Iran had been rejected, and  his  internet
         activity was opportunistic;


    (ii)   failing to give consideration into the country guidance case  of
         SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT
         00308 [IAC], in particular paragraph 30:


             "We  can  understand  the   sensitivity   that   the   Iranian
             authorities may have towards perceived slights  against  their
             own state in the form  of  untruthful  allegations  about  the
             conduct of the state, but equally one can expect a  degree  of
             reality on their  part  in  relation  to  people  who  in  the
             interests of advancing their economic circumstances would make
             up a story  in  order  to  secure  economic  betterment  in  a
             wealthier country. We  consider  that  the  suggestion  by  Dr
             Kakhki that the use of the term "national security" extends as
             broadly as to encompass people who  have  made  failed  asylum
             claims abroad is excessively speculative and has no evidential
             foundation to it."


    (iii)  failing to have regard to the relevant consideration  that  even
         if interrogated, the "truth" that the appellant could  be  expected
         to reveal was  that  his  posts  on  his  Facebook  page  were  not
         genuinely motivated and were prompted solely by desire  to  deceive
         the UK authorities for reason of economic betterment,  which  would
         be unlikely to raise concerns for the Iranian authorities;


    (iv)   failing to consider whether the  appellant  would  or  could  be
         expected to delete the potentially offending Facebook  posts  prior
         to returning to Iran;


    (v)    failing to make findings about whether the posts were likely  to
         attract wider social media attention, and  no  clear  finding  were
         made as to how  widely  the  published  the  posts  were,  nor  any
         indication as to how many people did/were reasonably likely to read
         the posts;


    (vi)   failing to appreciate at [31], when referring to AB and others ,
         that para 472 of that  decision  provided  "...this  might  not  of
         itself lead to persecution but it  may  enhance  risk  on  return";
         given that the risk was otherwise nonexistent it was contended that
         the judge had  failed to adequately reason the  level  of  risk  on
         return, and had failed to adequately explain how that  reached  the
         threshold of persecution.


11    Permission to appeal was given by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    O'Brien on 30 January 2018 on the basis that the grounds were arguable,
    and commenting that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  considered
    himself bound to follow AB and others, which  he  was  not  obliged  to
    follow, and failed to follow SSH, which he was.

12    I have heard from the parties in this matter. Mrs  Aboni  relied  upon
    the grounds of appeal, and Mr. Beckford relied upon  a  Rule  24  reply
    dated 22 February 2018, together with a further skeleton argument.

    Discussion

13    The judge referred to a number of paragraphs of AB and Others.  It  is
    appropriate to  set  out  the  section  of  the  decision  where  those
    paragraphs are to be found:

         "457.    We accept the evidence that some people who have  expected
         no trouble have found trouble and that does  concern  us.  We  also
         accept the evidence that  very  few  people  seem  to  be  returned
         unwillingly and this makes it very difficult to  predict  with  any
         degree of confidence what fate, if any, awaits them. There is clear
         evidence that some people are asked about their  internet  activity
         and particularly for their Facebook password. We can  think  of  no
         reason whatsoever to doubt this evidence. It  is  absolutely  clear
         that blogging and activities on Facebook are  very  common  amongst
         Iranian citizens and it is very clear that the Iranian  authorities
         are exceedingly twitchy about them. We cannot see why a person  who
         would attract the authorities sufficiently to be  interrogated  and
         asked to give account of his conduct outside of Iran would  not  be
         asked what he had done on the internet. Such a person could not  be
         expected to lie, partly because that is how the  law  is  developed
         and partly because, as is illustrated in one of the examples  given
         above, it is often quite easy to check up and expose such a person.
         We find that the act of returning someone creates a  "pinch  point"
         so  that  returnees  are  brought  into  direct  contact  with  the
         authorities in Iran who have  both  the  time  and  inclination  to
         interrogate them. We think it likely that they will be asked  about
         their internet activity  and  likely  if  they  have  any  internet
         activity for that to be exposed and if it is less  than  flattering
         of the government to lead to a real risk of persecution.


         ...


         In summary


         466.     It is very  difficult  to  establish  any  kind  of  clear
         picture about the risks consequent on blogging activities in  Iran.
         Very few people seem to be returned unwillingly and this  makes  it
         very difficult to predict with any degree of confidence what  fate,
         if any, awaits them. Some monitoring of activities outside Iran  is
         possible and it occurs.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  what
         circumstances, if any, enhance or dilute the risk although  a  high
         degree of activity is not necessary to attract persecution.


         467.     The mere fact  of  being  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         prolonged period does not lead to persecution. However it may  lead
         to scrutiny and there is clear evidence that some people are  asked
         about their internet activity and particularly for  their  Facebook
         password. The act of returning someone creates a "pinch  point"  so
         that a person is brought into direct contact with  the  authorities
         in Iran who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them.
         We think it likely that they will be  asked  about  their  internet
         activity and likely if they have any internet activity for that  to
         be exposed and if it is less than flattering of the  government  to
         lead to at the very least a real risk of persecution.


         468.     Social and  other  internet-based  media  is  used  widely
         through Iran by a  very  high  percentage  of  the  population  and
         activities such as blogging may be perceived as criticisms  of  the
         state which is very aware of the power of the internet. The Iranian
         authorities in their various guises both regulate  and  police  the
         internet, closing down or marking internet sites although this does
         not appear to be linked directly to persecution.


         469.     The  capability  to  monitor  outside  Iran  is  not  very
         different from the capability to monitor inside Iran.  The  Iranian
         authorities clearly have the capacity to restrict access to  social
         internet-based media. Overall it is  very  difficult  to  make  any
         sensible  findings  about  anything  that  converts   a   technical
         possibility of something being discovered into a real  risk  of  it
         being discovered.


         470.     The main concern is the pinch point of  return.  A  person
         who was returning to Iran after a reasonably short period  of  time
         on an ordinary passport having left  Iran  illegally  would  almost
         certainly not attract any particular attention at all and  for  the
         small number of people  who  would  be  returning  on  an  ordinary
         passport having left lawfully we do not think that there  would  be
         any risk to them at all.


         471.     However, as might more frequently be  the  case,  where  a
         person's leave to remain had lapsed and who might be travelling  on
         a special passport, there would  be  enhanced  interest.  The  more
         active they had been the  more  likely  the  authorities'  interest
         could lead to persecution.


         472.     The mere  fact  that  a  person,  if  extremely  discrete,
         blogged in the United Kingdom would not mean they would necessarily
         come to the attention of the authorities in Iran. However, if there
         was a lapse of discretion they could face hostile interrogation  on
         return which might expose them to risk. The more  active  a  person
         had been on the internet the greater the risk. It is  not  relevant
         if a person had used the internet  in  an  opportunistic  way.  The
         authorities are not concerned with a person's  motivation.  However
         in cases in which they have taken an interest  claiming  asylum  is
         viewed negatively. This may not of itself be sufficient to lead  to
         persecution but it may enhance the risk.


14    The crux of  the  respondent's  case  is  that  in  referring  to  the
    Tribunal's findings within AB and others, which was not, as  the  judge
    was aware, country guidance, and in failing to direct himself as to the
    content of SSH and HR, which  is  country  guidance,  paragraph  30  in
    particular,  the  judge  has  failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
    considerations.

15    However, I find no tension between the content of paragraph 30 of  SSH
    and HR (see para 10 (iii) above) and the findings in AB and Others that
    were relied upon by the judge. As Mr. Beckett argues, the  Tribunal  in
    SSH and HR were discussing at paragraph 30 the potential  treatment  of
    failed asylum  seekers  by  the  Iranian  authorities.  The  Tribunal's
    conclusion in that point was given  shortly  thereafter,  at  [33],  as
    follows:

         "We summarise our conclusions on the  country  guidance  issues  in
         these appeals as follows:


             (a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to  Iran,  who
             does not possess a passport, will be returnable on  a  laissez
             passer, which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on  proof
             of identity and nationality.


             (b) An Iranian male in respect of whom no adverse interest has
             previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not  face
             a real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3  rights  on
             return to Iran on account of having left Iran illegally and/or
             being a failed asylum seeker. No such risk exists at the  time
             of questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e.  of
             illegal exit and being  a  failed  asylum  seeker)  have  been
             established. In particular,  there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
             prosecution leading to imprisonment." (Emphasis added)


16    The expectation of a degree of reality on  the  part  of  the  Iranian
    authorities was to failed asylum seekers who had made  up  a  story  in
    support of an unsuccessful protection  claim.  The  appellant  is  such
    person, but, I find, only in respect of the story he gave of events  in
    Iran.

17    In the present case, it was also  the  case  that  the  appellant  had
    posted potentially inflammatory material on his Facebook account.  That
    fact that he had  done  so  was  not  disputed,  nor  was  the  judge's
    assessment at [32] that the material was indeed critical of the Iranian
    regime.

18    Even if, as per the conclusions of SSH and HR, a  returnee  would  not
    be at risk of harm in  Iran  merely  on  the  basis  that  the  Iranian
    authorities came to know that the returnee had  given  an  unflattering
    but false account of alleged events in Iran to the UK authorities in an
    unsuccessful claim for protection, a rational distinction can  properly
    be made between their likely reaction to such matters, on the one hand,
    and their discovery that an individual  had,  without  any  attempt  at
    being 'discreet' (AB and Others, para 472),  posted  critical  material
    about the Iranian government on  a  Facebook  page,  to  a  potentially
    global forum, even if done cynically, on the other.

19    It is appropriate to note that at [11]  in  SSH  and  HR  itself,  the
    Tribunal make reference to the case of AB and others:

         "In AB & Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015]
         UKUT 257 (IAC), there is reference at paragraph 457 to the  act  of
         returning someone creating a "pinch point" so  that  returnees  are
         brought into direct contact with the authorities in Iran  who  have
         both the time and inclination to interrogate them. That however was
         in the context of people who had engaged in internet activity,  and
         it is relevant to note also that at paragraph 470 the Tribunal said
         that a person who is returning to Iran  after  a  reasonably  short
         period of time on an  ordinary  passport,  having  left  illegally,
         would almost certainly not attract any particular attention at all.
         "


20    Therefore, in SSH and HR, AB and Others is distinguished on the  basis
    that it considers matters additional  to  a  returnee  merely  being  a
    failed asylum seeker. For my part, I cannot  see  any  tension  between
    paragraph 30 of SSH and HR, and the findings  made  in  AB  and  Others
    regarding potential risk arising from internet  activity.  The  judge's
    lack of reference to  SSH  and  HR  does  not,  therefore,  disclose  a
    material error of law.

21    I also  find  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  make  reference  to
    paragraph 472 of AB and Others, in which he had been observed that  the
    authorities were not concerned with a person's motivation. I find  that
    the judge was entitled to find that a real risk of harm arose  for  the
    appellant, notwithstanding that he had also find the appellant's online
    activity to be opportunistic. The approach that the  judge  took,  that
    the appellant may be asked about internet activity at the  pinch  point
    of return, did not pre-suppose that the appellant's material would have
    come to the Iranian authorities' prior attention, and the fact that the
    judge did not make  any  finding  as  to  how  widely  the  appellant's
    material may have been viewed would not in my view  have  affected  the
    judge's decision.

22    Further, in relation to  the  respondent's  argument  that  the  judge
    erred in law by failing to consider the potential for the appellant  to
    delete his Facebook account  I  find  the  judge  had  not  erred.  The
    respondent engaged very little with  the  appellant's  online  activity
    within the decision letter of 27 October 2017, and specifically did not
    make any suggestion that the appellant could delete  the  material,  or
    the whole of  his  account,  on  the  basis  that  they  postings  were
    opportunistic. Nor does the suggestion  appear  to  have  made  in  the
    course of the First tier hearing; there is  no  reference  to  such  an
    argument being advanced by the respondent before the judge.

23    It could be raised in a given case as to whether an individual  could,
    where the  content  of  a  Facebook  account  does  not  represent  any
    genuinely held belief, be expected to delete offending posts, or indeed
    the whole of the account. When that argument is  raised,  the  question
    would also need to be asked, and answered satisfactorily, as to whether
    the deletion of a Facebook account would have the effect of permanently
    removing material from the internet.  Those  matters  were  simply  not
    raised by the Respondent in  the  present  case  and  no  evidence  was
    adduced by the respondent as to the  effect  of  deletion  of  Facebook
    posts. I also find that these  matters  were  not  'Robinson  obvious'1
    points which the judge was obliged to consider of his own notion in the
    absence of them being raised by the parties.

24    Thus, the respondent's belated argument, raised for the first time  in
    the grounds of appeal dated 9 February 2018, that the  appellant  could
    be expected to delete his  Facebook  account,  does  not  disclose  any
    material error of law in the judge's decision.

25    Finally, I  note  that  Mrs  Oboni  no  longer  pursues  the  argument
    advanced in the grounds of appeal as summarised at [10(vi)] above.

    Decision

    The judge's decision did not include the making of any  material  error
    of law.

    I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

    I uphold the decision of the judge, allowing the appellant's appeal.


Signed:                                            Date: 9.1.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns a protection claim. Unless  and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the appellants  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Date: 9.1.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

1 Robinson, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department & Anor [1997] EWCA Civ 3090


