
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11190/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 October 2020                    |On 8 October 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     P R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel, instructed by Quality
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  His  date  of
    birth is 1 June 1973.  He made an  application  on  protection  grounds
    which was refused by the Secretary of State.  He appealed against  that
    decision.  His appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Kudhail.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed his  appeal  on  protection
    grounds and allowed his appeal under Article 8 of ECHR.  The  Appellant
    was granted permission to appeal against the dismissal of his appeal on
    protection grounds by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford on 25  June
    2020.

 2. The appeal was heard on 11 February 2020. The decision  of  the  judge,
    which comprises 27 pages, is dated 12 March 2020.

 3. The judge set out the  Appellant's  lengthy  immigration  history.  The
    Appellant made further submissions on 21 August 2019  under  paragraphs
    353 of the Immigration Rules which generated the decision which was the
    subject of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  judge  set
    out in detail the Respondent's claim, the Appellant's fresh submissions
    and documents in support.

 4. The Appellant's evidence as recorded by the judge was that he does  not
    hold any original Iraqi identification documents.  He is a  single  man
    with no children.  He grew up in Qalazada (the judge referred  to  this
    as "Q") with his family.  His father was a PUK member from 1978  and  a
    commander in the security forces.  As a result their home was  attacked
    several times.  In 1996 the Appellant was forced to work as a bodyguard
    for his father.  In 1998 he left his job and lived a  low-profile  life
    with various relatives.  In 1999 the Appellant was shot. He feared  for
    his life because of his role as a bodyguard and his  father's  role  in
    the security forces.  He decided to leave Iraq in January 2000.

 5. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by an Immigration Judge  Halliwell
    ("the first judge") on 3  September  2000.  However,  the  first  judge
    accepted the  central  core  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  his
    father's work and that it may carry some risks to his father and to the
    rest of the family.

 6. At paragraph 14 the judge noted that the Respondent relied  heavily  on
    the decision of the first judge.  The first judge's conclusion was that
    the risk to the Appellant was no higher than that to the  rest  of  his
    family who remain in their home area and that this indicated that there
    is sufficiency of protection.

 7. At the hearing, a new matter was advanced by the Appellant. He had been
    in the UK for twenty years and thus relied Article 8 as informed by the
    Immigration Rules. The Presenting Officer consented  to  the  Appellant
    relying on the new matter. The judge ultimately allowed the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 8. The Appellant gave evidence and was cross-examined at some length,  all
    of which is  set  out  in  detail  in  the  judge's  decision.  Several
    witnesses gave evidence in support  of  the  Appellant,  including  his
    sister ("Ms K").

 9. The judge set out the legal framework at paragraph 43 and the  case  of
    Devaseelan in  some  detail.   She  directed  herself  in  relation  to
    Devaseelan and said that  she  would  take  as  a  starting  point  the
    decision of the first judge.

10. The judge concluded that the Appellant was not  credible  and  had  not
    established on the lower standard of proof  that  he  was  at  risk  on
    return as a result of his father's role in the  PUK  and  his  father's
    current affiliation to the Goran Party or indeed his own profile  as  a
    member of the Goran Party in PUK.

11. At paragraph 64 the judge said "the only remaining question is  whether
    or not he could obtain the documents he needs on  return".   The  judge
    directed herself with reference to SMO,  KSP  and  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400.  She said the  Appellant
    is a former resident of the IKR and thus he would be  returned  to  the
    IKR.  She referred to the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  which  confirmed
    that the Appellant would be returning to Erbil  or  Sulaymaniyah.   The
    judge said that the first judge found that the  Appellant  lived  in  a
    town which was some distance to the east of  Sulaymaniyah  towards  the
    Iranian border.  The Appellant's sister in evidence confirmed  she  has
    been back to this area in 2019.  The judge said it is accessible.

12. At paragraph 66 the judge said that the Appellant's case is that he  is
    unable to access a CSID (or a new  biometric  Iraqi  national  identity
    card - the "INID").  The judge said as a general matter it is necessary
    for an individual to have one of these two documents to live and travel
    within Iraq without encountering  treatment  or  conditions  which  are
    contrary to Article 3 ECHR.  The judge said as follows.

         "68. The Appellant had attempted to go to the Iraqi Embassy to  get
             his Iraqi documents such as birth certificate, Iraqi  national
             ID and Iraqi national passport.  The evidence of  GA  (p73/AB)
             indicates he went to the Iraqi Embassy and was turned away  by
             an embassy employer as he had no  proof  of  his  nationality.
             This is consistent with the findings in SMO at paragraph 375.

         69.  The Appellant claims he travelled to the UK with his CSID  and
             then gave this to the agent who destroyed it.  I do not accept
             this account.  The agent had no reason to take this particular
             document  from  the  Appellant  and  it  is  unclear  how  the
             Appellant knows he destroyed it.  Further given its importance
             as highlighted in SMO, I do not accept  he  would  allow  this
             document to be taken.  This entire account  lacks  credibility
             and coupled with the  other  findings  I  do  not  accept  the
             Appellant no longer has his CSID.

         70.  In oral evidence the Appellant stated he does not  know  where
             his family currently are, I do not find this credible.  He has
             from his evidence had contact with them during his  time  here
             and certainly had  contact  with  them  in  2018.   He  states
             contact is dependent upon them contacting him.  I do not  find
             this credible as he has friends and neighbours who have  acted
             as witnesses who have contacts in his home  area  who  are  in
             touch with his family.  So, he can make contact.   Further  he
             lives with his sister, who stated she last visited her  family
             in 2019.  Thus, she has had recent physical contact with them.

         71.  Ms K in her oral evidence also stated she does  not  currently
             have contact with her family but failed to explain why this is
             the  case.   This  evidence  is  inconsistent  I  find  it  is
             embellished for the purpose of enabling the Appellant to state
             he cannot get his  CSID.   I  find  the  Appellant  does  have
             contact with his family and that the family have the CSID  and
             can send it to him in the UK.

             Acquiring a CSID via a proxy

         72.  In the alternative, I have considered  whether  the  Appellant
             could obtain a CSID by use  of  proxy  whilst  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  I  find,  following
             paragraphs 386 and 387 of SMO, that the  Appellant  could  not
             acquire a CSID or INID by himself from within Baghdad.

         73.  The Upper Tribunal in SMO provided at paragraph 389 that:

                  '389.    In respect of the CSID, the position  remains  as
                      it was before, subject to  the  introduction  of  the
                      INID and the gradual phasing out of the old forms  of
                      identification.  We are satisfied that  the  CSID  is
                      still being issued in parts of Iraq.  That  is  clear
                      from the  section  2.4.4  of  the  EASO  report.   We
                      consider it to be clear from that report, and from Dr
                      Fatah's evidence about the practice in the IKR,  that
                      an individual who is registered in a  city  in  which
                      the  INID  process  has  been  rolled  out  would  be
                      unlikely to secure a  replacement  CSID  there.   The
                      logic  which  underpins  Dr   Fatah's   evidence   is
                      irrefutable  and  was  implicitly  accepted  by   the
                      respondent at [151] of her closing submissions, which
                      spoke only of the CSID still being issued  'in  rural
                      areas'.  The Iraqi government wishes to have  a  more
                      secure identity system and has spent  large  sums  to
                      implement that new  system.   The  implementation  is
                      behind schedule.  In the event  that  CSID  documents
                      were issued by the CSA  offices  in  which  the  INID
                      terminals  have  already  been  located,  that  would
                      further delay the implementation of the  new  system.
                      In the event that an individual  CSA  office  has  no
                      terminal, the position is obviously different and  it
                      is individuals who are registered  at  those  offices
                      who might be able to secure a CSID by the  use  of  a
                      proxy.  We have no list of the CSA offices  which  do
                      and do not have an INID terminal,  however,  and  any
                      such list would  be  quickly  outdated  as  the  INID
                      programme continues to expand.  It will  consequently
                      be for an individual appellant who does not  have  an
                      CSID or an INID to establish on  the  lower  standard
                      that they cannot obtain a CSID by the use of a proxy,
                      whether from the UK or on arrival in Baghdad'.

         74.  I have no  direct  evidence  about  whether  or  not  an  INID
             terminal has been  set  up  in  Q  and  the  parties  made  no
             submissions  on  this  point.   If  it  has  been,  then   SMO
             establishes that the Appellant himself must be present at  the
             office in order to provide his biometrics and obtain the  INID
             document and as such the issue  of  using  a  proxy  does  not
             arise.  As such, I find that the  Appellant  cannot  obtain  a
             CSID by proxy.

         Acquiring a replacement CSID from within the United Kingdom via the
         consulate

         75.  Further  and  in  the  alternative,  I  consider  whether  the
             Appellant could obtain a CSID from within the consulate in the
             United Kingdom.

         76.  The relevant guidance from the Upper Tribunal  in  SMO  is  as
             follows:

                  '383.    We have not been  asked  to  revisit  the  extant
                      country guidance on the way in  which  an  individual
                      might obtain a replacement CSID from within  the  UK,
                      for which see [173]-[177] of AA (Iraq)  and  [26]  of
                      AAH (Iraq)'. ...

                      'Given this evidence, and the fact that the CSID  has
                      been a feature of Iraqi society for so  long,  we  do
                      not accept that there will come a time at the end  of
                      this  year  when  the  CSID  suddenly  ceases  to  be
                      acceptable as proof of identity' (paragraph 353).

         77.  The following points can be distilled:

                  177. In summary we conclude that it  is  possible  for  an
                      Iraqi national living in the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID
                      through the consular section of the Iraqi Embassy  in
                      London, if a person is able to produce a  current  or
                      expired passport and/or the book and page number  for
                      their family registration details.  (AA)

         78.  I take account of paragraph 26 of the judgment in  AAH  and  I
             note that the Tribunal was  recounting  the  evidence  of  Dr
             Fatah.  The Tribunal specifically records at paragraph 29 that
             'the key  piece  of  information  that  the  individual  would
             however have to have would be his  family's  volume  and  page
             reference number in the civil register'.

         79.  In SMO the Tribunal states at paragraph 385:

                  'The clear expectation - and this strand runs consistently
                  through the  country  guidance  decisions  -  is  that  an
                  individual should apply for a new or replacement  document
                  in the place where their family is registered, that  being
                  the location of the  Family  Book  ledgers  in  which  the
                  family record is  made  and  retained.   That  expectation
                  remains clear in the more recent evidence before us'.

         80.  I have considered the Appellant's evidence as to contact  with
             his family in Iraq above.  The Appellant has  failed  to  show
             that he has irretrievably  lost  contact  with  the  remaining
             members of his family in Iraq.  Even if  they  are  unable  to
             send him his CSID, I  find  that  his  parents,  brothers  and
             sisters including Ms K would know the family's volume and page
             reference number and could convey this to the Appellant.

         81.  I also take account of the following findings of the  Tribunal
             in SMO:-

                  '391.    We consider the number of individuals who do  not
                      know and could not ascertain their  volume  and  page
                      reference would  be  quite  small,  however.   It  is
                      impossible  to  overstate  the   importance   of   an
                      individual's volume and page reference in  the  civil
                      register.  These details appear on numerous  official
                      documents,  including  an  Iraqi  passport,   wedding
                      certificate and birth certificate,  as  well  as  the
                      CSID.    It  was  suggested  in  a  report  from  the
                      British Embassy in Baghdad, quoted at  6.1.9  of  the
                      Internal  Relocation  CPIN  of  February  2019,  that
                      "[a]ll Iraqi nationals will know or be able to easily
                      obtain  this  information".   We  find   the   former
                      assertion entirely unsurprising.  The volume and page
                      reference  in  the  civil  register  is  a  piece  of
                      information  which  is   of   significance   to   the
                      individual and their family from the moment of  their
                      birth.  It is entered on  various  documents  and  is
                      ever present in that person's life.  We do  not  lose
                      sight of the fact that  there  remain  a  significant
                      number of people in Iraq who are undocumented.  We do
                      not consider that problem to  be  attributable  to  a
                      difficulty with recalling the  relevant  information.
                      It is instead attributable to  the  closure  -  until
                      comparatively recently - of the local CSA offices  at
                      which people  were  required  to  obtain  replacement
                      documents and to their reluctance to return to  those
                      areas from a place of relocation.

                  392. There will of course be those who can plausibly claim
                      not to know these details.  Those who left Iraq at  a
                      particularly young age, those who are mentally unwell
                      and those who have issues with literacy  or  numeracy
                      may all be able to make such a claim plausibly but we
                      consider that it will be very much the exception that
                      an  individual  would  be  unaware  of  a  matter  so
                      fundamental to their own identity and that  of  their
                      family.  The letter from the Embassy  also  suggested
                      that  most  Iraqis  would  be  able  to  obtain  this
                      information  easily.   Again,   that   assertion   is
                      unsurprising when viewed in its proper  context.   As
                      is clear from AAH  (Iraq),  Iraq  is  a  collectivist
                      society in which the family is all important.  It  is
                      also a country  with  a  high  prevalence  of  mobile
                      telephone usage amongst the adult  population.   Even
                      when we bear  in  mind  the  years  of  conflict  and
                      displacement in Iraq, we would  expect  there  to  be
                      only a small number of cases in which  an  individual
                      could plausibly claim to have no means of  contacting
                      a family member from whom  the  relevant  volume  and
                      page reference could be obtained or traced back'.

         82.  Firstly, these findings  fortify  my  own  findings  above  in
             respect of the Appellant's contact with his  family  in  Iraq.
             Secondly, the Appellant on his own case has worked in Iraq and
             he had lived there for seventeen years.  Whilst he  left  Iraq
             twenty years ago,  he  is  a  healthy  man  and  there  is  no
             suggestion that he falls into the categories  of  one  of  the
             individuals who would be unable to recall their family  volume
             and page reference.  As I found earlier, this information must
             have been available to a family member particularly Ms K,  who
             came to the UK to join  her  husband  and  thus  must  have  a
             marriage certificate (p76/AB).  She is with her husband and so
             this information may be in her possession.

         83.  Accordingly, the Appellant has not established  to  the  lower
             standard that he would be unable to acquire a replacement CSID
             from the Iraqi Consulate in London using his family.  As such,
             I find that this option remains open to the Appellant".

13. The judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    Articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR,  however  at  paragraph  85  the  judge
    considered the appeal under Article 8 concluding that he had been  here
    for over twenty years and that he accordingly meets the requirements of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(ii).  His appeal was allowed under Article 8.

The grounds of appeal

14. The grounds of appeal are threefold.  The  first  ground  is  that  the
    judge did not consider the risk to the Appellant returning  to  Baghdad
    in the light of the acknowledgment  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that
    whilst flights have resumed  to  the  IKR,  returns  will  continue  to
    Baghdad.

15. Ground 2 asserts that the findings are inconsistent.  While  the  judge
    finds that the Appellant has his CSID he also found that his family has
    his CSID.   These  are  not  findings  in  the  alternative.  They  are
    inconsistent and irrational.

16. Ground 3 asserts that the judge's finding at paragraph 69  that  it  is
    inherently implausible that the Appellant would have allowed  his  CSID
    to be taken  from  him  by  an  agent  is  not  lawful  because  it  is
    inadequately reasoned. There is a myriad of  possible  reasons  why  an
    agent might have seized the Appellant's documents during the journey he
    facilitated.

17. Ground 4 concerns the Appellant's ability to obtain  a  CSID  from  the
    consulate in London. The Appellant relies on the evidence of  Dr  Fatah
    at [26] of AAH  (which was accepted  and  the  findings  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AAH in this respect were  undisturbed  by  SMO,  KSP  &  IM
    (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400. [1]

18. It is submitted that having the family volume  and  page  number  alone
    would still be insufficient to obtain a CSID in the United Kingdom. The
    Appellant would have to produce his Iraqi passport and proof of  status
    in the United Kingdom. The Appellant relies on [26] of AAH  to  support
    that the judge's findings are inadequate and or inadequately  reasoned.



19. Mr Melvin relied on the  Rule  24  response.  It  is  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that enforced returns  are  to  Baghdad.  The  judge
    found that the Appellant would be able to obtain documents which  would
    enable him to travel by air from Baghdad to the  IKR.   The  judge  was
    entitled to reject the Appellant's evidence that he gave  his  CSID  to
    the agent who in turn destroyed it. This should be  considered  in  the
    context of the judge having found the Appellant not  credible.  He  did
    not accept that the Appellant has lost contact with his family and  was
    entitled to conclude  that  his  family  has  the  CSID.  This  is  not
    inconsistent with the finding that he did not give it to the agent. The
    judge's findings are grounded the evidence and adequately reasoned.  In
    any event, the judge has clearly reasoned how the  Appellant  would  be
    able to obtain a CSID from the consulate in London.

SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG  [2019]  UKUT  400
(IAC)

20. The headnote to SMO reads as  follows  in  as  far  as  it  relates  to
    documentation and feasibility of return to the IKR reads as follows:-

         B.   DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)

         7.   Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
             will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.
             The Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in  the
             United Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession  of  a
             current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a  Laissez
             Passer.

         8.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
             possession of one of these documents.

         9.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
             and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
             EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection  claim  made  by  P
             cannot succeed by  reference  to  any  alleged  risk  of  harm
             arising from an absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport
             or a Laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds that P's return  is
             not currently feasible on account of a lack of  any  of  those
             documents.

         10.  Where P is returned to Iraq on a  Laissez  Passer  or  expired
             passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of
             return by reason of not having a current passport.

         C.   CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION

         11.  The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric Iraqi National
             Identity Card  -  the  INID.   As  a  general  matter,  it  is
             necessary for an individual to have one of these two documents
             in order to live and travel within Iraq  without  encountering
             treatment or  conditions  which  are  contrary  to  Article  3
             ECHR.   Many of the checkpoints in the country are  manned  by
             Shia militia who  are  not  controlled  by  the  GOI  and  are
             unlikely to permit an individual without a CSID or an INID  to
             pass.  A valid Iraqi passport is not recognised as  acceptable
             proof of identity for internal travel.

         12.  A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of  a
             CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is not, in
             any  event,  a  recognised  identity   document.    There   is
             insufficient evidence to show that returnees are issued with a
             'certification letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any
             such document would be  recognised  internally  as  acceptable
             proof of identity.

         13.  Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID within Iraq,
             replacement CSIDs  remain  available  through  Iraqi  Consular
             facilities.  Whether an individual will be able  to  obtain  a
             replacement CSID whilst in the UK  depends  on  the  documents
             available and, critically, the availability of the volume  and
             page reference of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq,  which
             system  continues  to  underpin  the  Civil  Status   Identity
             process.  Given the importance of that information, most Iraqi
             citizens will recall it. That information may also be obtained
             from family members, although  it  is  necessary  to  consider
             whether such relatives are on the  father's  or  the  mother's
             side because the registration system is patrilineal.

         14.  Once in Iraq, it  remains  the  case  that  an  individual  is
             expected to attend their local CSA office in order to obtain a
             replacement document.  All CSA  offices  have  now  re-opened,
             although the extent to which records have  been  destroyed  by
             the conflict with ISIL is  unclear,  and  is  likely  to  vary
             significantly depending on the extent  and  intensity  of  the
             conflict in the area in question.

         15.  An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is  not  likely
             to be  able  to  obtain  a  replacement  document  there,  and
             certainly not within a reasonable time.  Neither  the  Central
             Archive nor the assistance facilities for IDPs are  likely  to
             render documentation assistance to an undocumented returnee.

         16.  The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by
             the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return to  Iraq,
             has reduced due to the introduction of the  INID  system.   In
             order to obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local
             CSA office in person  to  enrol  their  biometrics,  including
             fingerprints and iris scans.  The CSA offices  in  which  INID
             terminals have been installed are unlikely - as  a  result  of
             the phased replacement of the CSID system - to issue  a  CSID,
             whether to an individual  in  person  or  to  a  proxy.    The
             reducing number of CSA offices in which  INID  terminals  have
             not been installed will continue to issue CSIDs to individuals
             and  their  proxies   upon   production   of   the   necessary
             information.

         E.   IRAQI KURDISH REGION

         20.  There are regular direct flights from  the  UK  to  the  Iraqi
             Kurdish Region and returns might be  to  Baghdad  or  to  that
             region.  It is for the respondent to state whether she intends
             to remove to Baghdad, Erbil or Sulaymaniyah.

         Kurds

         21.  For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or  Iraqi  National  Identity  Card
             (INID), the journey  from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR  by  land  is
             affordable and practical and can be made without a  real  risk
             of P suffering persecution, serious harm,  or  Article  3  ill
             treatment nor would  any  difficulties  on  the  journey  make
             relocation unduly harsh.

         22.  P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
             IKR without either a CSID, an INID or a valid passport.  If  P
             has one of those documents, the journey from  Baghdad  to  the
             IKR by land is  affordable  and  practical  and  can  be  made
             without a real risk of P suffering persecution, serious  harm,
             or Article 3 ill treatment nor would any difficulties  on  the
             journey make relocation unduly harsh.

         23.  P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or an INID.
             There  are  numerous  checkpoints  en  route,  including   two
             checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the  airport.   If  P
             has neither a CSID nor an INID there is a real risk of P being
             detained at a checkpoint  until  such  time  as  the  security
             personnel  are  able  to  verify  P's  identity.   It  is  not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
             checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.

         24.  Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
             granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,
             and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P  would  be
             permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal
             impediments  or  requirements.  There   are   no   sponsorship
             requirements for entry or residence in any of  the  three  IKR
             Governorates for Kurds.

Conclusions

21. The judge's primary finding is that the Appellant has his CSID.  It  is
    asserted that this is inconsistent with the finding at  [71]  that  his
    family has it.  The judge clearly found  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    credible, that he was in contact with his family and  that  his  family
    had the CSID. There is no conflict in the findings. A proper reading of
    the  decision  discloses  that  the  judge  found  that  the  CSID  was
    physically with his family and meant that the Appellant has  possession
    of it in this context.   The findings at [69] and [72] are rational.

22. The finding at [69] (that the Appellant's account in respect of  having
    given the CSID to the agent is  not  credible)  is  lawful.  Ms  Harris
    submitted that the Appellant was not found  to  be  wholly  lacking  in
    credibility and the finding which is essentially a plausibility finding
    is lacking in reasoning.  However,  while  there  are  aspects  of  the
    account that the judge accepted, overall, the judge did not findthe the
    Appellant credible. The judge did not accept that there was  a  current
    level of risk to him on account of his father's past role in  the  PUK,
    his father's current affiliation to the Goran party or his own  profile
    as a member of the Goran party  in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  properly
    reflects the decision overall that the core of the Appellant's  account
    was not found to be credible by the  judge.  With  this  in  mind,  the
    conclusion in respect of the CSID and the agent cannot properly  simply
    be characterised as a plausibility finding. As stated by the  judge  at
    [69] "... This entire account lacks credibility and  coupled  with  the
    other findings I do not accept that the Appellant  no  longer  has  his
    CSID".  In the light of the judge's conclusions about the CSID and  the
    lawful and sustainable finding that the Appellant has contact with  his
    family, the judge was wholly entitled to conclude  that  the  Appellant
    could safely return. Enforced returns are to Baghdad. In the  light  of
    the Appellant's family having his CSID, the judge was entitled to  find
    that he could safely return.

23. The judge did not need to consider the possibility of  redocumentation.
    However, his conclusions in this respect are sound.  The  challenge  is
    that the judge did not properly consider  this  in  the  light  of  the
    country guidance with specific reference to AAH. However,  the  problem
    for the Appellant is that his account was  rejected.  The  judge  found
    that he was in contact with his family. His evidence was  that  he  had
    lost  contact  with  them.  This  was  rejected.  The  finding  is  not
    challenged. Having rejected his evidence about contact with his  family
    - a core aspect of his account, there was no obligation on the judge to
    make any further findings of fact on the matter. The burden of proof is
    on the Appellant. Having found he was in contact with his  family,  the
    Appellant was not  capable  of  discharging  the  burden  of  proof  to
    establish that his parents would  not  be  able  to  send  to  him  the
    necessary documents. The judge's findings are adequate and  sufficient.
    In the light of the judge's lawful conclusions and applying the country
    guidance, it is difficult to see how he could have reached a  different
    conclusion.

24. The decision of the judge is lawful and sustainable. There is no  error
    of law. The decision to dismiss the appeal  on  protection  grounds  is
    allowed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Joanna  McWilliam                                    Date  5  October
2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------
[1] Paragraph [26] of AAH  reads  as  follows:-  "  If  applying  through  a
consulate abroad  the  requirements  are  different.  Having  contacted  the
consulate in London, and checked on the website  of  the  Iraqi  embassy  in
Sweden, Dr Fatah states that the authorities will require the  applicant  to
first make a statement explaining why he needs a CSID  and  attach  this  to
his  application  form,  which  must  countersigned  by  the  head  of   the
applicant's family and stamped by the consulate or  embassy;  he  must  then
produce his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the country  where  he  is
applying, the name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq, an  additional  form
completed by the head of the applicant's family verifying that the  contents
of his application form were true, four colour copies of  his  INC,  and  10
colour photographs.    Crucially the  applicant  must  be  able  to  produce
something which can establish the location of his family's  details  in  the
civil register. This should be a CSID, an INC or birth certificate. If  none
of these are available  to  the  applicant,  he  must  supply  the  identity
documents of his parents. This evidence again accords with that of  Landinfo
(December 2017) who conclude that it can be difficult to obtain  replacement
ID documents from an embassy abroad for the  individual  who  is  unable  to
verify his or her identity.

