
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11067/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 March 2021 by Skype            |On 30 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     KT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Shattock, Counsel instructed by Ahmed Rahman
                    Carr Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L. Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. This was a hearing by way of Case Management Review ("CMR").

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT")  against  a  decision  dated  7  September  2018  to  refuse  a
    protection and human rights claim. The FtT  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 3. On appeal to the Upper Tribunal ("UT"), his appeal  against  the  FtT's
    decision was dismissed and permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal
    was refused by a judge of the UT.

 4. The Court of Appeal, however, in a decision by  consent,  remitted  the
    appeal to the UT for a  fresh  decision  to  be  made  on  the  appeal.
    Although the terms of the consent order are not free from ambiguity, it
    was agreed before me at the CMR, that the effect of the decision of the
    Court of Appeal is that the FtT's decision is marred by  error  of  law
    such as to require it to be set aside. That, indeed, was my view  also.
    For the avoidance of doubt, the decision  of  the  FtT  is  hereby  set
    aside.

 5. It was further agreed between the parties that at a future hearing  the
    UT would have to consider whether to proceed  to  a  re-making  of  the
    decision or to remit the appeal to the FtT.

 6. Given that there needs to be a fresh consideration of  the  credibility
    of the appellant's claim, it  was  also  agreed  that  the  appropriate
    course is for the appeal to be remitted to the FtT  for  a  hearing  de
    novo. I similarly agree with that course, having  regard  to  paragraph
    7.2 of the Practice Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals.

 7. In the circumstances, the appeal is remitted to the FtT for  a  hearing
    de novo, on all grounds, before a judge other than First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Onoufriou or Manuell, with no findings of fact preserved.

 8. The emphasis on the direction that no findings of  fact  are  preserved
    reflects the fact that this was a matter that was canvassed at the  CMR
    and was agreed between the parties.

 9. Pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, no reasons (or further reasons) are required, the  decision
    being made with the consent of the parties.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this is a protection claim, unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and   to   the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


A.M. Kopieczek

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            12/03/2021
