
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11445/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 2 May 2017                       |On 10 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     k a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Broom, Solicitor from Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Courtney (the judge), promulgated on 15  December  2016,
    in which she dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The
    Appellant, a Moroccan national, had arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in
    June 2012.  Thereafter she made various applications in  this  country,
    all of which were unsuccessful.   On  15  September  2015  she  claimed
    asylum.  Her claim was based in large part  upon  her  marriage  to  an
    Italian national.  It was asserted by the Appellant that this  marriage
    had led to a desire by her  father  to  harm  her  based  on  perceived
    undermining of the family's honour.  The Respondent refused  the  claim
    by a decision of 9 October 2016.

The judge's decision

 2. Overall the judge found the Appellant and her supporting witness to  be
    credible (paragraph 41).  Having considered the Appellant's  particular
    circumstances and the country information the judge finds at paragraphs
    50 and 54 that the Appellant was at risk in her  home  area.  The  risk
    emanated from her father, against whom there  would  be  no  sufficient
    protection by the Moroccan authorities.

 3. The judge then goes on to consider the issue  of  internal  relocation.
    She concludes that  there  was  only  a  "remote"  possibility  of  the
    Appellant's family being able to trace her outside of her home area  of
    Casablanca.   The  judge  considers  relevant  case  law  and   country
    information and concludes that on the facts  of  the  case  before  her
    internal  relocation  was  a  viable  option.   For  this  reason   the
    protection claim failed.

 4. Finally, the judge notes that by way of concession from the Appellant's
    representative Article 8 was not being pursued.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. There are three grounds.  The first  of  these  states  in  terms  that
    material findings of the judge are irrational/perverse.  In essence  it
    is said that given  a  number  of  the  judge's  findings  relating  in
    particular to the risk in the home area, she was bound to conclude that
    this Appellant could not internally relocate.  Particular reference  is
    made to paragraph 59 in which the judge said that there was no need for
    the Appellant to expose her past history of  marriage  to  the  Italian
    national (who also happened to be a Christian).  It is said  that  this
    finding was not rational in light of the country evidence, which showed
    that it was illegal for a Muslim woman to marry a non-Muslim man.   The
    second ground relates to alleged procedural  unfairness.   It  is  said
    that the judge  should  have  adjourned  the  case  in  order  for  the
    Appellant to be able to obtain an  expert  report.   The  third  ground
    relates to Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR  and  humanitarian  protection.
    It is said that the judge has not dealt with  these  adequately  or  at
    all.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker  by
    a decision dated 16 March 2017.  Particular reference is  made  in  the
    grant to paragraph 59 of the judge's decision (referred to previously).

The hearing before me

 7. At the outset  Ms  Broom  confirmed  that  an  adjournment  application
    previously made  in  writing  but  refused  by  a  judge  at  the  Case
    Management Review hearing had not been renewed at  the  appeal  hearing
    before the judge.   In  light  of  this  she  fairly  acknowledged  the
    difficulty in pursuing ground 2.

 8. In respect of ground 1,  she  submitted  that  a  "remote"  possibility
    amounted to a sufficient basis to show risk in any other  place  within
    Morocco, but in any event the possibility was  more  than  remote.   Ms
    Broom submitted that the  authorities  could  contact  the  Appellant's
    father wherever she may be once they found out from her that he was her
    father and/or that she had been married to a non-Muslim man.  She could
    not hide these facts.  She reiterated the point that it was illegal for
    a Muslim woman to marry a non-Muslim man.  She referred me to pages 319
    and 353 of the Appellant's bundle, a bundle that was in  front  of  the
    judge.

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted that the adjournment point had no  merit  because
    the application had not been renewed in front of the judge.  In respect
    of paragraph 59 of the judge's decision, he reminded me of  the  higher
    threshold required where perversity is alleged.  It was unclear  as  to
    what was or was not said to the judge about the  Appellant's  claim  at
    the  hearing.   The  faith  of  the  Appellant's  husband   would   not
    necessarily be determinable from his surname  only.   Even  if  such  a
    marriage was illegal in Morocco there was no evidence about the effects
    of this on the Appellant in respect of internal relocation.  There  was
    a lack of evidence overall.

10. In reply Ms Broom submitted that the Appellant's father would find  out
    about her whereabouts, that the authorities would find  out  about  the
    marriage, and that there was  a  lack  of  support  for  women  in  the
    Appellant's position.

11. I reserved my decision on error of law.

Decision on error of law

12. After careful consideration I have concluded that there are no material
    errors of law in the judge's decision.  My reasons for this  conclusion
    are as follows.

13.  On  the  adjournment  issue,  whilst  I  fully  acknowledge  that   an
    application for an adjournment was made on the papers prior to the Case
    Management Review stage on the basis that expert evidence  was  sought,
    this application was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant at that
    initial point.  The refusal was, I am satisfied,  communicated  to  the
    Appellant and her representatives.  The adjournment application was not
    renewed  before  the  judge  at  the  oral  hearing.   Ms   Broom   has
    acknowledged this fact, and having looked at all the  papers  including
    the Record of Proceedings for myself I am fully satisfied that this  is
    the case.  That being so there was in fact no application to adjourn in
    order to seek any  country  evidence.   The  judge  clearly  cannot  be
    criticised for proceeding in the absence of any such application.  That
    disposes of ground 2 of the grounds of appeal.

14. In respect of ground 1, Mr Whitwell  was  right  in  pointing  out  the
    implications of mounting an irrationality challenge to the findings  of
    the judge.  There is an "elevated threshold" in such  cases,  in  other
    words the Appellant has to  show  that  the  findings  and  conclusions
    reached by the judge were ones  to  which  no  reasonable  judge  could
    possibly have arrived at.  In my view this  elevated  threshold  simply
    has not been met by the Appellant in this case.

15. The assertion that a "remote" risk amounts to a serious possibility  is
    misconceived.  The judge was fully entitled to find that the  risk  was
    remote, and then that such a remote risk did not  discharge  the  lower
    standard of proof.

16. The judge is to be commended in my view for a thorough consideration of
    all of the issues  in  the  case  before  her  including,  importantly,
    relevant country information.  She had fully in mind the problems faced
    by women, including matters  relating  to  their  legal  standing,  the
    attitude  of  the  authorities,  and  the   nature   of   institutional
    discrimination (see for example paragraphs 48 to 57).   The  judge  was
    fully aware of  the  particular  circumstances  to  be  faced  by  this
    Appellant upon return including the absence of a male protector  or  of
    family support.  Indeed,  the  judge  had  of  course  found  that  the
    Appellant was at risk from her father in the home area.

17. She then quite properly went on to consider  in  detail  the  issue  of
    internal relocation.  It did not necessarily follow that a risk in  the
    home area would translate to a risk throughout Morocco.  In my view the
    judge undertook a detailed exercise in the assessment of facts, law and
    background country information, and  derived  from  this  findings  and
    conclusions which were entirely open to her.  Certainly, in the context
    of a rationality challenge, the simple fact that Appellant was at  risk
    in the home area, would not have had familial  support  elsewhere,  and
    was a woman, did not of itself mean either that she had to be  at  risk
    everywhere or that internal  relocation  would  necessarily  be  unduly
    harsh.

18. Paragraph 59 is an important passage and one that  has  given  rise  to
    particular thought when making my decision.  The judge  states:  "There
    will be no need for [K A] to expose her past history of marriage  to  a
    Christian man to those with whom she comes into  contact  elsewhere  in
    Morocco."  I appreciate why the Appellant has sought to challenge  this
    in light of the HJ (Iran) principle.   However  there  is  no  material
    error. Ms Broom has sought to suggest that her status would  inevitably
    be disclosed and that in some way this would mean that her father would
    then be alerted to her location. He could then find her and  harm  her.
    Alternatively, she seemed to indicate that the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk from the authorities themselves.  However, having  looked  at  the
    Appellant's skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Record of Proceedings, and the papers as a whole, this is not  the  way
    in which the case appears to have been put to the judge.  There was  no
    evidence before  her  or  indeed  submissions  made  to  her  that  the
    Appellant would be bound to reveal who her husband  was  (or  at  least
    what his  religion  was),  no  evidence  that  such  information  would
    inevitably come to light in any event, nor any evidence that she  could
    be tracked down by her father through the Appellant's interaction  with
    the authorities elsewhere in the country.  Indeed, on this last  point,
    at paragraph 57 the judge specifically finds that the  family  did  not
    have power or influence such that it could obtain the assistance of the
    Moroccan authorities in tracking down the Appellant.  There was clearly
    no expert evidence  on  the  point.   I  see  nothing  in  the  country
    information to which the judge was referred, and there  is  nothing  in
    the note of the oral submissions contained in the Record of Proceedings
    to indicate that such a submission was put to her at the hearing.

19. Having regard to the skeleton argument,  in  particular  paragraphs  11
    through to 15, the case was  put  very  much  on  the  basis  that  the
    marriage led to the risk of honour killing.  There is also reference to
    the lack of state protection, but of course the judge  has  found  that
    there was a risk in the home area. However, she then provides  reasoned
    and rational findings and conclusions to support her view that the risk
    did not exist throughout Morocco.  In respect of the  illegality  of  a
    marriage between the Appellant and her husband (which I note was deemed
    to be a sham marriage by the judge: see paragraph  27),  there  was  no
    evidence before the judge  as  far  as  I  can  tell  as  to  what  the
    consequences of that could be in respect of the Appellant's ability  to
    internally relocate.  There was no evidence about the attitude  of  the
    authorities  to  such  a  status.   There   was   no   evidence   about
    prosecutions.  There was no evidence about harm done to people  in  the
    Appellant's situation by either the authorities or  society  at  large.
    There was certainly no evidence that the Appellant's father would as  a
    matter of course be informed of  her  whereabouts  by  the  authorities
    should they or anybody else discover that the  Appellant  was  in  fact
    married to a non-Muslim man.

20. In light of the above, I see no irrationality at all. Even if  it  were
    to be said that there was an error in  approach  in  paragraph  59,  it
    would not be material in light of the dearth  of  evidence  before  the
    judge.

21. Finally, I briefly address ground 3.  It is quite clear that Articles 2
    and 3 ECHR and humanitarian protection added nothing to the Appellant's
    overall protection claim.  These issues stood or fell with  the  asylum
    claim.

Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                                  Date: 9 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 9 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

