
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11918/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2018                  |On 03 October 2018                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                  NAJOB [R]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    M J Gajjar of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State for the Home
         Department. The respondent is a national  of  Afghanistan  born  on
         before April 1993. However, for the sake of  convenience,  I  shall
         continue to refer to the parties as they were  referred  to  before
         the proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The respondent appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  the  decision
         of First-tier Judge Dineen promulgated on 22 June 2018 allowing the
         appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  November
         2017 refusing his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection  and
         to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to section 10 of the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

      3. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Chohan on 16 July 2018 stating it is arguable that  the  Judge  who
         heard the case on December 2017 decision was not promulgated  until
         June 2018. In that time, the country guidance case  of  Afghanistan
         had been reported, namely, AS  (safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
         [2018] UKUT 118. The permission Judge noted that there  is  nothing
         to indicate in the decision that this  country  guidance  case  had
         been considered. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the  appellant
         credible but failed to consider internal relocation to Kabul.

      4. At the hearing, Mr Tarlow said that the decision needs to be remade
         in light of the case of AS. Mr Gujjar submitted that  there  is  no
         material error of law as the decision of AS has been considered  in
         substance even if it was not cited in the decision.

      5. The Judge found the appellant was at risk his return to Afghanistan
         as recognised by the Refugee Convention. He  stated  that  the  key
         issue in the appeal is whether the appellant is credible about  his
         treatment from the Taliban. He stated that he appellant worked as a
         lorry driver and this is not disputed by the respondent. The  Judge
         relied on the expert  report  which  stated  that  the  appellant's
         account is consistent in the context of Afghanistan. Noted that  at
         paragraph 18, the expert states that the  haulage  firms  concerned
         are regularly mentioned  the  media,  and  that  nearly  all  major
         construction firms work for the government. The Judge accepted that
         the appellant was apprehended by the Taliban as it accords with the
         expert evidence as  to  the  Taliban  practice  of  kidnapping  and
         targeting of civilians and the attacking  of  convoys  and  haulage
         firms. The Judge accepted that because of the nature  of  his  job,
         the appellant would have been useful to the Taliban if he could  be
         caused by threats to himself and his family to  comply  with  their
         demands.

      6. The Judge failed entirely to consider whether relocation  to  Kabul
         was an option available to the appellant. The Judge made a material
         error by not considering the country guidance case  in  respect  of
         possible relocation  to  Kabul  even  if  he  found  the  appellant
         credible.

      7. I therefore set aside the decision,  in  part,  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge and preserve his findings as to the  credibility  of
         the appellant. The only issue  to  be  determined  at  the  renewed
         hearing at the First-tier Tribunal before any  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge other than Judge Dineen is whether taking  into  account  the
         recent country guidance case of AS, relocation to Kabul is a viable
         option for this appellant.

    Decision

    The appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal



Signed by,

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Ms S Chana  Dated this 26th day of September 2018













