

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11122/2017

|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 19 February 2020                          |on 25 February 2020           |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Grier instructed by Batley Law Ltd
For the Respondent: Mrs R Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 31 January 2019 the Upper Tribunal set aside a decision  of  the
        First-Tier Tribunal which dismissed the appellant's appeal.
     2. The appellant applied for international protection as a result of a
        fear of persecution on return to Sudan given his membership of  the
        Bergo tribe.
     3. The First-Tier Tribunal did  not  accept  the  appellant's  claimed
        ethnicity.
     4. The appeal was adjourned to await the outcome of  the  new  country
        guidance case relating to Sudan which has now been reported as  AAR
        & AA (Non-Arab Darfuris-return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 00282 (IAC).
     5. In accordance with case management  directions  the  appellant  has
        provided a supplementary bundle containing witness statements  from
        3 relatives who have been granted status in the United  Kingdom  on
        the basis of their accepted  ethnicity  as  members  of  the  Bergo
        tribe, a medical repot,  and  2  letters  from  the  Ouaddai/Bargo-
        Selleyhad Community in the UK. The Tribunal also has before it  the
        appellant's original appeal bundle containing  the  country  expert
        report of Mr Peter Verney.
     6. Mrs Petterson  confirmed  that  enquiries  she  had  made  for  the
        purposes of this hearing confirmed the accuracy  of  the  statement
        that the witnesses have been granted  international  protection  in
        the United Kingdom on the basis of their accepted ethnicity.
     7. In light of the  weight  of  evidence  now  available  it  was  not
        disputed that the appellant is a member of the Bergo tribe and,  in
        accordance with AAR & AA that it was necessary to  assess  risk  by
        reference to the country guidance cases of  AA  (non-Arab  Darfuris
        -relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuri) Sudan  CG
        [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) at this time.
     8. It is accepted the appellant was arrested and detained in Sudan for
        20 days on 2 August 2016 before he fled the country on  15  October
        2016.
     9. It is not disputed in light of all the available evidence that  the
        appellant will face a real risk of persecution on return  to  Sudan
        as a result of his ethnicity sufficient to entitle him to  a  grant
        of international protection. Accordingly this appeal is allowed  on
        asylum grounds.


Decision

    10. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.

Anonymity.


    11. The anonymity order made  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure          (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 shall continue until
        further order.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 February 2020












