

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/11189/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |      Decision and Reasons           |
|Centre                                |Promulgated                          |
|On 9th April 2019                     |      On 16th April 2019             |
|                                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     HA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Madubuire, Broudie Jackson and Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  HA.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




         1. The appellant, an Iraqi citizen born in Sulaymaniyah  in  1991,
            made a protection and human rights  claim  in  June  2016.  Her
            husband had previously made an  asylum  claim  which  had  been
            refused and his appeal (with her as his  dependant)  dismissed.
            Her husband  was  her  dependant  in  this  claim  and  appeal,
            together with their child born in the UK in 2016.


         2. Her claim was refused by the respondent for reasons set out  in
            a decision dated 5 September  2018.  Her  appeal  against  that
            decision was heard by First-tier Tribunal judge  Cox  and,  for
            reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated  on  22nd  November
            2018, was dismissed.

         3. Permission was sought and, in a succinct  summary,  granted  by
            UTJ Smith in the following terms:

                  ...
                  4.Ground one  concerns  the  judge's  findings  about  the
                 appellant's conversion to Christianity. Although the  judge
                 provides  a  number  of  reasons  for  not  accepting   the
                 appellant's word on this, he does accept at [77]  and  [78]
                 of the  decision  that  the  appellant's  husband  (who  is
                 dependent on her claim) is a genuine convert and  that  she
                 attends church with him to support his conversion  to  that
                 faith. This is not therefore a claim which is found  to  be
                 fabricated. It is arguable that the  judge  thereafter  has
                 failed properly to consider the risk on this  account  (see
                 in particular [95] and [96] of the decision.
                  5. Ground two concerns the return of the appellant and her
                 husband to Baghdad and route thereafter to IKR  (given  the
                 judge's "concerns" about them remaining in Baghdad at  [95]
                 of the decision). Although the judge does not  say,  as  it
                 appears to be asserted, that the appellant would be able to
                 return to IKR travelling on her husband's documents, it  is
                 arguable  that  the  judges  approach  to  return  of   the
                 appellant  (whose  identity  documents  are  said  by   the
                 respondent  to  be  false)  is  inconsistent  with  Country
                 guidance.


         4. The paragraphs of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision
            referred to in the grant of permission read as follows:


                  77. On the totality of  the  evidence,  I  find  that  the
                  appellant may follow Pentecostalism in  that  she  attends
                  Sunday service regularly. However,  this  is  because  her
                  husband follows the faith and does not reflect  a  genuine
                  conviction on her part. The  appellant  claimed  that  she
                  attended church prior to [her husband's]  arrival  in  the
                  UK, but she has not provided any evidence to support  this
                  aspect of her claim and I note that one  of  the  churches
                  she claimed to have attended was Church of England.
                  78.  As  can  be  seen,  although  I  have  treated   [her
                  husband's] evidence with considerable scepticism,  I  find
                  that  he  does  follow  Pentecostalism.  However,  in  the
                  absence of a baptism certificate and because  he  had  not
                  raised the change in his faith at his  appeal,  I  am  not
                  satisfied that he was baptised in the UK in 2013 or  2014.
                  I do not know if (or when) he was baptised.  Nevertheless,
                  I  found  striking  that  within  a  few  weeks  of   [her
                  husband's] arrival in the UK, the family  start  attending
                  their nearest Pentecostal church. Further, Mr Meggers  has
                  had the opportunity to see and listen to [her husband] for
                  over  16  months  and  is  satisfied  that  [her  husband]
                  genuinely follows the faith.
                  ...
                  95. Overall, I would be concerned if  the  family  had  to
                  stay in Baghdad. However, as the appellant's  husband  has
                  appropriate documentation and the appellant will  only  be
                  removed if she has similar documentation, I  am  satisfied
                  that the family would not have to remain  in  Baghdad.  As
                  was noted in AAH, the family can get to the IKR relatively
                  easily. In my view, if the appellant and her husband  were
                  prepared to hide their religion, when they  were  married,
                  then they have no reason to disabuse the notion that he is
                  a Muslim whilst they travel to the IKR. Obviously I do not
                  expect him to be discreet in the IKR.
                  96. The evidence relating to the situation for  Christians
                  in the IKR is limited and a country expert report may have
                  assisted me. Unfortunately, I do not have  such  a  report
                  available,  and  having  carefully  considered   all   the
                  evidence, I find that the appellant  has  not  established
                  that there is  real  risk  of  her  or  her  family  being
                  persecuted  because  her  husband  follows  the  Pentecost
                  faith.

            Ground 1


         5. Mr Madubuire amplified the grounds of appeal  relied  upon  and
            drew my attention to the sections of  the  Country  Information
            and Guidance dated August 2016 that referred  to  the  IKR.  In
            particular he referred to sections 5.3, 5.4, 5.5 and  6.2.4  to
            6.2.9. The finding by the judge  did  not,  he  submitted  take
            proper account  of  the  evidence  that  was  before  him  such
            evidence  being  sufficient  to  support  a  finding  that  the
            appellant would, because  of  her  support  for  her  husband's
            conversion, be at risk of being persecuted. He referred to  the
            comment of the judge that there  was  inadequate  documentation
            and that he might have been assisted by an expert report.


         6. It is correct that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  might  have
            been assisted by other  evidence,  but  the  burden  of  proof,
            albeit a low burden of proof, is on the appellant. There was no
            request by the appellant for an adjournment to  obtain  further
            evidence.

         7. The finding by the judge in [96]  is  not  a  finding  made  in
            isolation without consideration of the evidence before him. The
            appellant's  solicitors  had  submitted  a   full   bundle   of
            background material and the judge  refers  in  detail  to  this
            earlier in  his  decision.  The  judge  considers  the  Country
            Information Guidance: Iraq, religious minority groups  and  the
            references in that  document  to  the  UNHCR  report  assessing
            protection needs and refers to the Gospel Herald report. It  is
            clear that the judge did not only consider the sections of  the
            CIG referred to above but gave his full attention to the  whole
            report.

         8. As Mr Tan said, the evidence in connection  with  the  IKR  and
            converts that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was
            thin. The source  quoted  in  5.5.2  is  referring  to  Ninevah
            province, which is not in the IKR. Although there is  reference
            to   political   isolation   and    dis-proportionate    under-
            representation of minority religious groups, there  was  simply
            insufficient evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  judge  to
            enable a finding that either the  appellant's  husband  (as  an
            accepted convert) or his wife as a supporter would be  at  risk
            of being persecuted in the IKR.

         9. There is no error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in
            his finding that the appellant had not established that she was
            at real risk of being persecuted in the IKR as the spouse of  a
            Christian  convert  who  supported  her  husband;   there   was
            insufficient evidence to support a finding that her husband was
            at real risk of being persecuted in  the  IKR  as  a  Christian
            convert .

            Ground 2

        10. The First-tier Tribunal judge  expressed  "concerns"  over  the
            possible risks if the family had to remain in Baghdad.


        11. The head note of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq
            CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) reads, where relevant, as follows:


                  Section C of Country Guidance  annexed  to  the  Court  of
                  Appeal's decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State  for
                  the Home Department [2017] Imm AR 1440;  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
                  944 is supplemented with the following guidance:


                  1. Whilst  it  remains  possible  for  an  Iraqi  national
                     returnee (P) to obtain a new CSID whether P is able  to
                     do so, or do so within a reasonable  time  frame,  will
                     depend on the individual circumstances. Factors  to  be
                     considered include:


                     i) Whether P has any other form  of  documentation,  or
                        information about the location of his entry  in  the
                        civil register.  An  INC,  passport,  birth/marriage
                        certificates or an expired  CSID  would  all  be  of
                        substantial assistance. For someone in possession of
                        one or more of these documents the process should be
                        straightforward.  A  laissez-passer  should  not  be
                        counted for these  purposes:  these  can  be  issued
                        without any other form of ID  being  available,  are
                        not of any  assistance  in  'tracing  back'  to  the
                        family record and are confiscated  upon  arrival  at
                        Baghdad;


                    ii) The location of the relevant civil registry  office.
                        If it is in an area held, or formerly held, by ISIL,
                        is it operational?


                   iii) Are there male family members who would be able  and
                        willing  to  attend  the  civil  registry  with   P?
                        Because the registration system  is  patrilineal  it
                        will be relevant to consider whether the relative is
                        from the mother or father's side. A  maternal  uncle
                        in possession of his CSID would be able to assist in
                        locating the original place of registration  of  the
                        individual's mother, and from there the trail  would
                        need to be followed to the place  that  her  records
                        were transferred upon  marriage.  It  must  also  be
                        borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in
                        Iraq are themselves undocumented;  if  that  is  the
                        case  it  is  unlikely  that  they   could   be   of
                        assistance.  A woman  without  a  male  relative  to
                        assist with the  process  of  redocumentation  would
                        face very significant obstacles  in  that  officials
                        may refuse to deal with her case at all.


                  Section E of Country Guidance  annexed  to  the  Court  of
                  Appeal's decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State  for
                  the Home Department [2017] Imm AR 1440;  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
                  944 is replaced with the following guidance:


                  2. There are currently no  international  flights  to  the
                     Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United
                     Kingdom are to Baghdad.


                  3. For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish origin in
                     possession of a  valid  CSID  or  Iraqi  passport,  the
                     journey from Baghdad to the  IKR,  whether  by  air  or
                     land, is affordable  and  practical  and  can  be  made
                     without a real risk of P suffering persecution, serious
                     harm,  Article  3   ill   treatment   nor   would   any
                     difficulties on  the  journey  make  relocation  unduly
                     harsh.


                  4. P is unable to board a domestic flight between  Baghdad
                     and the IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


                  5. P will  face  considerable  difficulty  in  making  the
                     journey between Baghdad and the IKR by land  without  a
                     CSID or valid passport. There are numerous  checkpoints
                     en route, including two checkpoints  in  the  immediate
                     vicinity of the airport.  If P has neither a CSID nor a
                     valid passport there is a real risk of P being detained
                     at  a  checkpoint  until  such  time  as  the  security
                     personnel are able to verify P's identity.  It  is  not
                     reasonable to require P to travel between  Baghdad  and
                     IKR by land absent the  ability  of  P  to  verify  his
                     identity at a checkpoint. This  normally  requires  the
                     attendance of a male family member  and  production  of
                     P's identity documents but  may  also  be  achieved  by
                     calling upon "connections" higher up in  the  chain  of
                     command.


                  6. Once at the IKR border (land or air) P  would  normally
                     be granted entry to the territory. Subject to  security
                     screening, and  registering  presence  with  the  local
                     mukhtar, P would be permitted to enter  and  reside  in
                     the  IKR  with  no   further   legal   impediments   or
                     requirements. There is no sponsorship  requirement  for
                     Kurds.
                  ....

        12. The appellant's husband has a CSID. In support  of  her  asylum
            claim, the appellant produced her marriage certificate and what
            she submitted was her Iraqi Nationality Certificate  No  XXXXXX
            which gave her place of birth as Sulaymaniyah. That Certificate
            was found to be counterfeit by the  respondent.  The  appellant
            does not state that  the  information  on  the  Certificate  is
            correct, even though she does not dispute that the  Certificate
            itself is not genuine. Her marriage certificate shows her folio
            number. Also produced in support of her asylum claim  were  her
            husband's ID documents, the validity  of  which  has  not  been
            disputed, which state that he was born in Erbil.


        13. The appellant's claim to be at risk of honour  crime  has  been
            roundly  rejected.  She  has  not  sought  to  challenge  those
            findings by way of onward appeal. She has paternal  uncles  and
            cousins in the IKR. Her husband has family members in the  IKR.
            Her husband was in the IKR in 2014  and  was  issued  with  his
            personal documents there - after their marriage. There  was  no
            evidence submitted that could support the contention  that  the
            appellant  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID  within  a
            reasonable timescale either on arrival  in  Baghdad  or  before
            leaving the UK - she is in a better position than  many  Iraqis
            in that she not only has male relatives in the IKR who would be
            able to assist but she does not come from a contested area  and
            her folio numbers are known and available to her.

        14. Although the respondent has stated that he would not remove her
            without relevant documents, perfectly lawfully, and  would  aim
            to remove them as a as a family, there is, in my view,  nothing
            to prevent her husband from returning to the IKR and  obtaining
            her CSID for her. That he would prefer not  to  travel  and  be
            away from his wife for  a  short  time  is  not  a  sustainable
            reason, without more, for finding that she could not  obtain  a
            CSID. In any event, as  referred  to  above,  there  are  other
            family members who could assist. There was no  submission  that
            the couple's children would not  be  able  to  obtain  relevant
            documentation despite having been born outside the IKR.

        15. Put another way, it is open to the appellant to  put  in  place
            arrangements so that the family can be removed  together.  That
            she may choose not to put those arrangements in place, does not
            mean that her husband is not liable to be removed as  a  failed
            asylum seeker. If that does happen it is a consequence  of  her
            not doing that which is reasonable for her to  do  namely  call
            upon her and/or his family to obtain  the  documents  that  she
            requires to enable her to travel.

        16. The First-tier Tribunal judge could possibly have expressed his
            findings with more clarity, but the evidence before him was not
            that she could travel on her husband's documents  or  that  she
            would not  be  able  to  obtain  documents  with  ease.  Having
            obtained  documents,  the  case  law,  which   has   not   been
            distinguished remains that she can travel from Baghdad  to  the
            IKR by air. There was no challenge to that finding of the First-
            tier Tribunal.

        17. There is no error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  as
            relied upon in Ground 2.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing her appeal


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I make an order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).









                                    Date 12th April 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
