
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/11582/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                        |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On December 8, 2017                       |  On December 12, 2017           |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                       MR KAMALALDIN HOSSEINI JAFARLOU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Tabassum (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeetie, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant is an Iranian national.  The appellant entered the United
    Kingdom on April 19, 2016 and claimed asylum.  The  respondent  refused
    his protection claim on October 6, 2016 under paragraphs 336  and  339F
    HC 395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  October  20,  2016  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Swinnerton
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on February 13, 2017 and in a decision
    promulgated on February 28, 2017 the Judge refused his  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on March  7,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Shaerf on April 25, 2017 who found the grounds arguable. The respondent
    lodged a Rule 24 response dated May 11, 2017 in which she argues  there
    was no error in law.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Miss Tabassum adopted the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    Judge had erred in his approach to the Dorodian witness evidence. Three
    witnesses have attended and given evidence which the Judge did not find
    any fault but he then went on to reject their  evidence  and  find  the
    appellant was not a genuine Christian. Although the Judge made  adverse
    findings on the appellant's account of what happened in Iran  this  did
    not  mean  his  conversion  was  not  genuine  especially  where  three
    witnesses had attested to his genuineness. The Judge made findings over
    aspects of the witness  evidence  without  giving  those  witnesses  an
    opportunity to address any concerns.

 7. Mr McVeetie relied on the Rule 24 statement and submitted  that  having
    rejected his credibility the Judge considered his sur  place  claim  of
    being a Christian convert. He gave reasons for rejecting his claim  and
    whilst he accepted the Church witnesses were both honest and sincere he
    ultimately concluded the appellant was not a genuine convert.

 8. Having heard submissions I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

 9. The Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982  provided  guidance
    on what could amount to an error in law. Clearly,  if  Miss  Tabassum's
    submissions were made out there would be an error in law.

10. The main ground of appeal in my view centred around  the  treatment  of
    the Dorodian witness evidence. Miss Tabussum's submission was  two-fold
    namely (a) the Judge should have put his concerns to the witnesses  and
    (b) their evidence should have been given more weight when  considering
    the credibility of the appellant's claim to be a convert.

11. In considering the appellant's claim the Judge initially  had  to  deal
    with his claim of what happened in Iran.  He  claimed  there  had  been
    problems between his family and Etelaat and that  the  authorities  had
    taken his family's land and not paid any  compensation.  The  appellant
    claimed he wrote about the authorities in a derogatory way and that his
    writings had been discovered and he was now a  wanted  man.  The  Judge
    rejected this claim and in appealing the decision no challenge has been
    made to these findings.

12. The Judge went onto consider the evidence of him  having  converted  to
    Christianity. The Judge accepted the three church witnesses  were  both
    honest and sincere and he set out their evidence between [10] and [17].
    Whilst recording their evidence the Judge has also  passed  comment  on
    all the  evidence  relating  to  his  conversion  claim.  There  is  no
    suggestion that the Judge recorded their evidence incorrectly and there
    was a detailed examination of their evidence. Miss Tabassum  criticises
    the Judge's approach to their  evidence  and  his  rejection  of  their
    evidence. It is clear from the Judge's consideration that  he  did  not
    ignore the Dorodian witness evidence but considered their opinions  and
    against the written and oral evidence provided by the appellant.

13. The Judge did not accept his claim of attending a secret Church meeting
    in Iran and whilst he accepted  the  Dorodian  witnesses  believed  the
    appellant was a genuine convert he ultimately had to decide whether the
    appellant was actually a genuine convert. Contrary  to  the  submission
    made by Miss Tabassum I am satisfied  the  Judge  gave  weight  to  the
    evidence of the witnesses. The Judge is not required to  put  potential
    findings to the witnesses because his role is to  assess  the  evidence
    rather than make enquiries of witnesses. The challenges to the  Judge's
    findings amount to a disagreement with those  findings.  The  Judge  is
    entitled to place such weight on the evidence as he thinks  appropriate
    and that is exactly what he did.

14. The decision in SA (Iran) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin) is a judicial
    review appeal. The case points out the pitfall of a person peering into
    a person's  soul  but  ultimately  that  is  what  the  three  Dorodian
    witnesses were actually doing. The fact was he claimed to attend church
    services and meetings on a specified number  of  occasions.  The  issue
    ultimately for the Judge was whether he was genuine in  his  belief  or
    not. The Dorodian witnesses' opinions  together  with  the  appellant's
    evidence was something the Judge considered but ultimately he concluded
    the appellant was not genuine. I am not satisfied there was an error in
    law.

    DECISION

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the decision.


Signed                              Date     08.12.2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed                              Date     08.12.2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





