
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11909/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre         Decision & Reason
Promulgated
On 22nd August 2018                                                  On 5th
October 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                                  MR. S I O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant: Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the respondent: Mr Howard, Counsel, instructed by Fountain Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. It is the Secretary of State who is appealing in these proceedings.
      For convenience, I will continue to refer to the parties hereinafter
      as in the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The appellant is from a village in Kirkuk, Iraq and of Kurdish
      ethnicity. He is a Sunni Muslim. He was born in January 1998. He
      claimed Isis came to his farm in 2014 and took him away. When his
      mother protested they killed her. He was detained for a year, during
      which time he was raped and beaten. Isis then took him to hospital in
      Mosul so they could obtain his blood for use in transfusions for to
      their own members. In the hospital by chance he met his aunt who was a
      doctor and she helped him escape. Arrangements were made with an agent
      and he travelled to the United Kingdom leaving his home country in or
      around September 2015 and arriving here in mid December 2015. He said
      that he made his claim for protection the following day. He had a CSID
      document but claimed it was lost when the family home was destroyed in
      2014 and he has since been unsuccessful in obtaining a replacement,
      referring to the lack of documentation as to his identity. He claimed
      he has been unable to contact his father or brother or sister nor his
      aunt who helped him escape.

   3. His claim was refused on 1 November 2017. His identity was accepted.
      However, his claim of escaping from Isis was not accepted. Some
      aspects of his claim were consistent with country information. For
      instance, the time it would have taken to go from his village to Mosel
      and the reports that Isis had been forcing prisoners to give blood.

   4. The respondent discovered he had been in Belgium and given a different
      name which undermined his credibility. He travelled through France and
      failed to claim there. In any event the respondent took the view that
      conditions in the country had improved and if needs be he could
      internally relocate to Baghdad or the Iraqi Kurdish region.

The First tier Tribunal

   5. His appeal was heard at Manchester on 22 December 2017 before
      Designated Immigration Judge McClure. In a decision promulgated on 7
      March 2018 it was dismissed on asylum grounds and allowed on
      humanitarian protection and articles 2 and 3. The judge accepted he
      had been detained by ISIS but did not accept his account of escaping
      from a hospital. The judge concluded with the changing country
      situation Isis would no longer be able to track him and that he did
      not face a risk for a Convention reason. The judge rejected his claim
      that the villagers would believe he had joined Isis.


   6. The judge referred to ongoing hostilities between Kurdish forces and
      the Iraqi army as well as the conflicts with Isis. Civilians therefore
      would face a 15 C risk.

   7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis the judge did not take
      into account country information indicating an improved security
      situation or the appellant's ability to obtain a CS ID. Reference was
      made to the negative credibility findings. I have received a rule 24
      response from the appellant's representative. It contends that the
      challenge amounts to a disagreement with the judge's findings of fact.
      It states Designated Immigration Judge McClure correctly followed the
      current country guidance information.

   8. I have been provided with the decision of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
      relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 which was heard on the 27th and 28 of
      February 2018 with the decision promulgated on 26 June 2018.
      Consequently, it postdates the hearing before Designated Immigration
      Judge McClure. It gives supplementary guidance to section C of the
      guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's decision in AA (Iraq)-v-
      SSHD [2017] Imm AR 1440. The section is dealing with a CS ID and the
      head note of the latest guidance details relevant factors in
      considering whether a replacement CSID is likely to be obtainable.
      These include whether the appellant has any other form of
      documentation or details about the entry in the civil register. The
      location of the registry office would be relevant, including whether
      it was in an area held by formerly held by ISIL and whether it is
      still operational. Another factor is whether there are male family
      members who could go to the office to seek the documentation. This new
      country guidance also replaces part E which deals with the IKR.

At hearing.


   9. Mr Tan continued to rely upon the grounds for which permission had
      been granted. He submitted that there had been an incomplete
      consideration by Designated Immigration Judge McClure of the issues
      arising. He said that it was not until paragraph 45 of the judge's
      decision that the findings are set out and it is contended that there
      was no clear finding as to the appellant's ability to get
      documentation either here or shortly on return. He also submitted the
      judge did not set out findings as to how the appellant would fare
      either in Baghdad or the IKR. The judge had accepted that the
      appellant's account was consistent with the background information but
      had rejected his claim about escape. On the basis that his credibility
      was thereby damaged this was relevant to his claims about
      documentation.


  10.  Mr Howard in response submitted the decision confirms the judge was
      aware of the country guidance cases and the country information.
      Paragraph 16 of the decision records the ongoing fighting in the
      country and identifies the issue as to whether or not there has been a
      significant and sustained change in the situation so that the
      appellant is no longer entitled to humanitarian protection. Therefore,
      the judge appreciated the points made by the respondent when
      considering the appeal. The argument advanced by the respondent about
      a change in the country situation and the level of violence is set out
      at paragraph 44.

  11. Having rejected the appellant's claim about his escape and concluding
      locals would not believe he had joined Isis the judge at paragraph 54
      concluded he was not at risk for any Convention reason. At paragraph
      55 on the judge went on to consider the general circumstances in his
      home area, a contested area. The judge concluded in paragraph 56 that
      whilst Isis was no longer in the area this did not find this meant
      there was no longer a significant and substantial reduction in the
      fighting. The judge referred to ongoing fights between Kurdish forces
      and the Iraqi army and fighting against Isis. The judge concluded
      therefore that civilians in the region would continue to be at
      significant risk of indiscriminate violence as set out in the country
      guidance cases. Therefore, he submitted the judge had in mind the
      country guidance decision and the new background information and had
      reached an informed and considered conclusion on this.


  12. On the issue of relocation Mr Howard referred me to the judge's
      finding at paragraph 47 that the appellant had been seized by Isis and
      detained. He acknowledged that the details about his ability to obtain
      the CSID and to relocate was limited but referred to paragraph 34
      where the appellant set out how his documentation had been destroyed.
      Paragraph 53 of the decision records the appellant saying he had not
      been in touch with anyone from his home village. The judge rejected
      his claim that villagers believed he had joined Isis.

Conclusions

  13. The judge has set out in detail the appellant's claim and the
      arguments by the respondent about changes in the country situation.
      The judge had regard to the country guidance then available. Clearly
      therefore the judge appreciated the competing arguments and the
      country conditions. The judge did not have the benefit of AAH (Iraqi
      Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 as it had not been
      promulgated at that stage. However, I see nothing about the updated
      decision which would inevitably have led to a different conclusion.


  14. At paragraph 18 onwards the judge sets out the claim and made clear
      findings about what was accepted and what was rejected. The judge did
      not reject in entirety the appellant's credibility. The account given
      was consistent with the country information. What the judge rejected
      was his claimed escape.

  15.  It was a matter for the judge to decide whether the situation in the
      country had changed to such an extent that the guidance given in the
      case law could be departed from. The judge declined to do this. The
      judge accepted that the Refugee Convention was no longer applicable
      because of the decline of Isis. The judge found the appellant would
      not face persecution because he was Sunni.

  16. The judge concluded the situation in the appellant's home area was
      such that he was entitled to humanitarian protection. Such a finding
      was not dependent upon the appellant's credibility. The judge referred
      to ongoing fighting between Kurdish and Iraqi fighters as well as
      ongoing skirmishes with Isis.

  17. It can be inferred that the judge accepted the appellant did not have
      and could not obtain documentation. There was nothing to suggest the
      office in his home area was functioning to reissue new documents or
      that the appellant had the necessary details. There was nothing to
      suggest there was a male member of his family who would be in a
      position to assist with documentation. The decision should not be
      considered in a vacuum. The judge had the benefit of the respective
      bundles including the appellant's substantive interview in which a
      question 17 to 20 he indicated no contact with his aunt or other
      family members.

  18. If the did not have the CSID or the means to obtain one fairly quickly
      then he could not realistically be returned, even on an interim basis,
      to Baghdad.

  19. The decision indicates the care taken with the appeal. The focus was
      upon determining the truth of the underlying claim, with the judge
      accepting parts and rejecting other parts. The judge concluded the
      Refugee Convention was not engaged and explained why. The judge had
      regard to the country guidance cases and concluded a 15 C risk
      prevailed in his home area. If he were unable to obtain the CSI the
      then a detailed consideration of relocation was not necessary.
      Consequently, I do not find any material error of law established.

Decision.

No material error has been established in the decision of Designated
Immigration Judge McClure. Consequently, that decision which dismissed the
appeal on asylum grounds and allowed it on humanitarian protection and
articles 2 and 3 shall stand.

Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

