
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11747/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 March 2019                     |On 01 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    m m a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco, counsel instructed by Schneider
                    Goldstein Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national of  Bangladesh,  date  of  birth  31  December
    1993, appealed against the Secretary  of  State's  decision,  dated  13
    October 2017, to refuse an asylum/protection based claim.   His  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen who  on  19  December  2018
    dismissed his appeal against that decision.  Permission to  appeal  the
    Judge's decision was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Garratt  on  8
    February 2019.

2.   Permission was given on the basis primarily, it seemed to me,  that  it
    was  considered  in  the  grounds  that  the  Judge  had  identified  a
    discrepancy in the basis of the Appellant's  claim  which  was  not  in
    reality a discrepancy.  The  Judge's  view  had  been  derived  from  a
    misunderstanding and  the  repetition  of  a  misunderstanding  by  the
    Secretary of State in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter.   In  addition,
    there were other issues taken as to the extent to which the  Judge  had
    properly  addressed  supporting  documentation  relied  upon   by   the
    Appellant and properly assessment the evidence  in  the  light  of  the
    Appellant's mental health issues.

3.   The Appellant, before the Judge, was represented  by  very  experienced
    counsel and it was clear both from the grounds of appeal and  from  the
    matters recorded by the Judge that the  Appellant's  representative  at
    the hearing had not argued or submitted that care and caution needed to
    be given to the reliability of  the  Appellant's  evidence  because  of
    mental health issues.  If  that  had  been  at  the  forefront  of  the
    evidence it seemed to me wholly unlikely that his representative  would
    have ignored it.  In the Appellant's bundle there was a letter dated 13
    September 2018 from the Appellant's solicitors  asking  for  a  medical
    report amongst other thing addressing the ability and  fitness  of  the
    Appellant to give evidence and whether his  evidence  could  be  relied
    upon.  It was clear from the report of Dr  Kahmud  MBBS,  LMSSA,  LRCP,
    LRCS. DRCOG from what appeared to be a GP practice at Wembley  Road  in
    East London that apart from a general description the doctor was unable
    to express a view amongst other things on the  Appellant's  ability  to
    give evidence.

4.   The Judge noted in the decision  that  the  Appellant  had  said,  when
    asked with reference to the GP  letter  about  the  issue  of  suicidal
    ideation, that he had not mentioned it in his witness statement but  he
    did not know why not and as he said at the end of it "... his  mind  is
    not working properly".

5.   It was clear that the Appellant gave his evidence  as  did  others  and
    the representations made on his behalf at the conclusion of the hearing
    did not indicate an invitation to the Judge  to  treat  with  care  the
    Appellant's evidence because of  mental  health  or  general  wellbeing
    issues.  The determination was silent as to that matter and equally the
    grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal   are   silent   as   to   any
    representations  being  made  to  that  effect  to  the  Judge  by  the
    Appellant's representative.

6.   I agree with Mr Franco that there may well  be  circumstances  where  a
    Judge may for his own purpose raise concerns about the  reliability  of
    the evidence being given at the time and/or its confusing  presentation
    or whatever may be the pertinent considerations. The Judge would  raise
    it with the parties or invite the parties to  make  submissions  as  to
    discrepancies, differences in the evidence and why they may  have  come
    about.  Again, it did not appear from the decision nor  the  Record  of
    Proceedings that this issue was raised.   Nor  was  it  raised  in  the
    skeleton argument advanced on behalf of the Appellant  at  the  hearing
    that caution was needed to address the  claim  being  made  because  of
    unreliability in the Appellant's recollection.

7.   For these reasons, I do not conclude that the Judge made any  error  of
    law in failing to carefully consider the evidence.   Attractive  as  Mr
    Franco made and iterated the point it did  not  seem  to  me  that  the
    assessment the Judge made was simply driven by 'the date issue'  as  to
    when the Appellant had either actively pursued  his  claimed  sexuality
    with one friend (SA) of his  in Bangladesh and/or that he was  involved
    in the incident which the Appellant claimed was  the  trigger  for  his
    needing to leave Bangladesh.  It could be as Mr Franco rightly  pointed
    out that in the Reasons for Refusal Letter there was a juxtaposition of
    dates and events and that  may  have  caused  the  factual  discrepancy
    there.  The Judge looked at the variety in and whole  of  the  evidence
    rather than simply finding the Appellant could not succeed in his claim
    because he had been discrepant in his  account  of  when  the  relevant
    events relied upon had occurred.

8.   On a fair reading of the decision, which Mr Franco does not  avoid  but
    perhaps with no discourtesy to him he does to a degree elide, the  fact
    was that the Judge in considering this matter set out a number of other
    matters where he found  the  Appellant's  evidence  at  odds  with  the
    genuineness of his claim as to his sexuality: See for example  and  not
    exclusively [D36, 37, 39, 40, 41,42, 43, 44, 46] and of other witnesses
    issues at [D47, 48, 49 and 50].

9.   It therefore seemed to me, putting aside the way the  Judge  summarised
    the overall position, it was, to a degree, unhelpful to say that  there
    were further discrepancies which formed the basis of the view that  the
    Appellant's claim was implausible; but which he did not set  them  out.
    It would perhaps have been helpful to have done so but since we do  not
    know what those discrepancies were the conclusion appears  to  be  that
    the Judge who heard the evidence  and submissions ultimately  took  the
    view [D52]'... the Appellant's evidence before me was evasive,  lacking
    in cohesive detail and I find  this  to  be  further  damaging  to  his
    credibility'.

10.  Mr Franco would probably and reasonably  say,  with  reference  to  his
    point about the Judge's failing to properly assess the vulnerability of
    the Appellant, the impact that might have  in  the  assessment  of  his
    evidence, the evidence as a whole, that that illustrated just  why  the
    decision was unreliable and therefore should be set aside.

11.  For my part sympathetic as one may be  to  the  attractiveness  of  the
    argument I conclude that the Judge did address the evidence and made an
    assessment which he was entitled to make.  Of concern  was  undoubtedly
    what the Judge said [D51]:-

         "the Appellant has produced miscellaneous additional  documentation
         in  support  of   his   claim,   including   medical   and   police
         documentation, but in respect of the  same  and  having  regard  to
         Tanveer Ahmed, having regard to  my  adverse  credibility  findings
         above, I attach little weight to the same".

    This was a somewhat less than full expression of  why  there  was  some
    concerns about the reliability of whatever was the medical evidence the
    Judge was referring to let alone the police documentation.

12.  The case file and the  bundles  do  not,  at  least  for  my  purposes,
    disclose what the police documentation may  have  been.    The  medical
    evidence was the report of the Appellant  being  treated  for  injuries
    after an attack but on what basis and what was the cause of the  attack
    the medical evidence does not identify.  It therefore may  be  that  it
    has some relevance but to what extent it  truly  goes  to  support  the
    issues, I cannot tell.

13.  However absent of anyone being able to point to such  medical  evidence
    or police documentation for the purposes of the appeal to show why  the
    judge erred in the view he expressed I do not think the matter  can  be
    taken further but it did seem to me it would have been better  to  have
    expressed more fully what  the  problem  with  the  documentation  was.
    Similarly, as was clear from the case law [D46]  finding  documentation
    was self-serving did require a reason however brief and short.  In this
    case it seems to me marginal but I find there is  sufficient  reasoning
    given [ D46] to explain the context and  why  the  Judge  thought  that
    statement was self-serving.

14.  Therefore, understanding the reservations that the  Appellant  has  and
    appreciating it is not the result he wanted it did not seem to me  that
    the grounds demonstrated a material error of law.

15.  The grounds argued a further  point  by  reference  to  the  background
    evidence but rightly Mr Franco acknowledged the  point  was  contingent
    upon a conclusion that the Appellant was of the sexuality claimed.   It
    was not seriously argued that if he had been found to be gay  then  the
    realities were that he could not safely return to live a life as a  gay
    man in Bangladesh.  For obvious reasons, in the light of  the  Original
    Tribunal's decision nothing further need be said about  it.   Whilst  I
    note what the Judge said in granting permission  as  to  the  Appellant
    suffering from anxiety and depression I return to the  points  made  at
    the outset that that had not formed the basis of the  claim  either  in
    the  sense  of  demonstrating  that  the  Appellant's   condition   was
    associated with the anxiety and stress  related  to  his  sexuality  as
    opposed to, for example, the continuing uncertainties of an immigration
    status or such other causes as there may be. In the circumstances I did
    not find that that of itself demonstrated an arguable material error of
    law.

16.  For these reasons it seems to me  that  there  was  no  basis,  by  the
    Appellant's solicitors, for any implicit criticism of the way the  case
    was presented by Counsel below. It did not seem to me in the  light  of
    the way the decision was written and the way the grounds  were  drafted
    that there was any basis to criticise Counsel.

DECISION

17.  The Original  Tribunal's  decision  stands.  The  appeal  against  that
    decision is dismissed.

18.  An anonymity order was made.  It is to be continued.



DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   Date 21 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   Date 21 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal
