
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/11722/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 April 2019                     |On 9 May 2019                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     MA
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1993.  He appealed against a
    decision of the respondent made on 20  September  2018  to  refuse  his
    claim to asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim is  that  he  fears  persecution  on  return  on
    account of his conversion to the Christian faith.

 3. A previous application on the same  basis  made  in  October  2016  was
    refused on 14 March 2017.  An appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    dismissed on 17 May 2017 with appeal rights exhausted  on  6  September
    2017.

 4. In the refusal letter for the second application the respondent did not
    believe the appellant was a genuine Christian  convert.   Reliance  was
    placed on the adverse credibility findings made by the first tribunal.

 5. He appealed.

First-tier hearing

 6. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 2 November  2018  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Devittie  dismissed  the  appeal.   He  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant and two witnesses  from  the  church.   His
    findings are at paragraph [11]ff.  He took as his  starting  point  the
    first tribunal's adverse credibility findings which he  sets  out  over
    two and a half pages.

 7. He noted that the further evidence on  which  the  appellant  seeks  to
    differentiate his current claim from the previous one  comes  from  the
    church.  In that regard he noted further evidence in  support,  namely,
    "Two letters from Dr Masters, senior pastor of the  Tabernacle  Church;
    letter from pastor Mohamed; letter  from  Mrs  Helen  Crompton  of  the
    Tabernacle Church; witness statement of Dr Behnam of  the  Metropolitan
    Tabernacle Church; screenshots from the appellant's Christianity-themed
    pages; photographs of the appellant  proselytizing."   The  Judge  also
    noted that pastor Mohamed and Mrs Crompton gave oral evidence.

 8. His conclusions on the church evidence are at [14].   He  accepted  the
    bona fides of the witnesses  but  considered  that  the  appellant  had
    hoodwinked them into believing him to be a genuine  Christian  convert.
    He went on at [15] to consider the critical question to be what  weight
    should be given to the church witnesses.  He continued:

         "What is clear to  me  is  that  their  evidence  cannot  stand  in
         isolation in my assessment of whether the appellant  is  a  genuine
         convert.  Their evidence falls to be considered in  the  round  and
         therefore in the context of the totality of the  evidence.   Herein
         lies the appellant's difficulty - the comprehensive findings of the
         first immigration judge ..."

 9. And at [16] he considered that the  probative  force  of  the  previous
    judge's findings "points so compellingly to the appellant not  being  a
    genuine convert, that the weight of evidence of the church witnesses is
    considerably undermined ..."

10. He sought permission to appeal which was granted on 15 February 2019.

Error of law hearing

11. At the  error  of  law  hearing  before  me  the  crux  of  Mr  Gayle's
    submissions was that the judge failed properly to consider the evidence
    of the appellant's sur place  Christian  activities  in  light  of  the
    guidance given in TF and MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58 to which he had  been
    referred.

12. Ms Willocks-Briscoe's response was that the  judge's  conclusions  were
    open to him.  As he indicated he had considered the evidence of the two
    church witnesses but he was entitled  when  weighed  with  the  adverse
    findings and inconsistencies noted by the previous tribunal to conclude
    that it did not overcome the burden on the appellant.   As  he  further
    indicated he had considered the evidence in the round.

Consideration

13. I find merit in Mr Gayle's submission.  At [48] of TF and MA the  court
    said this:

         "... Any court or tribunal must be very careful not to  dismiss  an
         appeal just because an appellant has told lies ... the judge should
         not jump too readily to the conclusion that because  the  appellant
         has told lies about  some  matters  then  his  credibility  on  all
         matters is fatally undermined."

14. And at [49]:

         "... Even if the FtT Judge concludes that the witness's evidence on
         the critical  matters  is  undermined  by  a  finding  that  he  is
         generally incredible and not to be relied on, that has the  limited
         effect that the appellant's (disbelieved) evidence  is  disregarded
         or put to one side; it does not  somehow  become  evidence  to  the
         opposite effect, to be used against the appellant in  contradiction
         of other independent evidence on which he relies ... So here, where
         the FtT judges have disbelieved the appellants' evidence that  they
         are genuine converts to Christianity, their evidence to that effect
         will be put to one side and given no weight.  But the rejection  of
         their evidence on this point does not become  evidence  that  their
         conversion is not genuine, to be set  against  other,  independent,
         evidence from which the genuineness  of  their  conversion  can  be
         inferred.  That other evidence  requires  to  be  assessed  on  its
         merits,  without  any  a  priori  assumption   derived   from   the
         complainer's own false evidence that it is in some way  suspect  or
         of little value."

15. Finally at [59]:

         "It is legitimate to question the experts on their opinions and  as
         to the basis upon which they have reached these opinions.  In  some
         cases it may be appropriate to  question  the  objectivity  of  the
         assessment made by the witness, or to suggest that there may be  an
         element of wishful thinking given the evangelised  mission  of  the
         particular church.  But as we have already made clear that exercise
         should not start with any predisposition  to  reject  the  evidence
         because it does not fit in with some a priori view formed as to the
         credibility of the appellant.  The evidence should be considered on
         its merits and without any preconception, based upon an  assessment
         of the individual appellants that it is suspect or otherwise  falls
         to be disregarded."

16. As indicated there was documentary and oral evidence from the church in
    support of the appeal.  The evidence of Pastor Mohamed was set  out  in
    detail at [9] of the judge's decision.  It included  that  it  was  not
    unusual for the church to refuse baptism if they had any  doubts.   The
    decision is made  on  an  assessment  of  the  spiritual  life  of  the
    prospective convert who has to provide written and oral  testimony  and
    he is interviewed by two elders.  The pastor is  not  involved  because
    the church wants to check that the story is consistent.  The  appellant
    had lived with a brother from the church for some eight months.  If his
    conversion was suspect this would have been mentioned by the elder.

17. The evidence of the second witness, Helen Crompton, is also set out  in
    some detail at [16].  She reiterated the church's approach to accepting
    the genuineness of asylum seekers.  A retired  civil  servant  who  had
    been a benefits  office  manager  she  made  clear  that  she  was  not
    gullible.

18. The judge by simply stating that the  unsatisfactory  features  of  the
    appellant's evidence identified by the  previous  tribunal  "points  so
    compellingly to the appellant not being  a  genuine  convert  that  the
    weight of evidence of the church witnesses is considerably  undermined"
    failed to follow the  guidance  that  the  church  evidence  should  be
    considered on its merits and without any preconception. What  he  ought
    to have done was to look at all the evidence in the case, including the
    evidence from the Tabernacle Church witnesses, on its own merits before
    forming a concluded view as to the veracity of the appellant.

19. In failing to give  sufficient  analysis  of  the  nature,  extent  and
    quality of the evidence of the  church  witnesses  in  delineating  the
    existence or otherwise of an objective foundation for  what  the  judge
    accepted (at [14]) as their "unstinting faith in  the  authenticity  of
    the appellant's conversion", he erred such  that  his  findings  cannot
    stand and the case must be reheard.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material  error  of  law.
    It is set aside.  The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate
    under Section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2 to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing on all issues.  No findings stand.  The  members  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to consider the  case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Devittie.

    An anonymity order is made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date: 03 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
