
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11098/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st March 2019                            |On 29th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     bk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer of Counsel instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge McAll (the judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 8th November 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a male Iranian citizen born 16th September 1987.

 3. The Appellant made an international protection claim in the UK  on  the
    basis that he had converted to Christianity and would  be  at  risk  if
    returned to Iran, and his removal from the UK would  breach  his  human
    rights, protected by the 1950 European Convention.

 4. The application was refused by the Respondent on 4th  July  2018.   The
    appeal was heard by the FtT on 19th October 2018.

 5. The judge did not find the Appellant to be  a  credible  witness.   The
    judge accepted that two members of the church attended by the Appellant
    had attended the hearing, but did  not  find  that  the  Appellant  had
    genuinely converted to Christianity.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk if returned to Iran and his  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. Five grounds were relied upon.  It was contended  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law in the following ways.

 7. Firstly the judge had made a material misdirection in law.   The  judge
    had erred at paragraph 29 in finding that the church  attended  by  the
    Appellant, was opposed to homosexuality, which did  not  indicate  that
    the church held the beliefs of forgiveness, kindness  and  love,  which
    were the qualities the Appellant had said had persuaded  him  to  leave
    Islam and convert to Christianity.

 8. Secondly the judge had erred by failing to apply the principles  in  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

 9. Thirdly the judge had erred by taking into account an  immaterial  fact
    by concluding that the Appellant displayed a very  basic  knowledge  of
    Christianity during his asylum interview.  It was  contended  that  the
    Appellant's level of knowledge was not a relevant consideration.

10. Fourthly the judge  had  erred  by  acting  perversely  by  reaching  a
    conclusion that it was incredible that a person who has lost  faith  in
    the religion they were born into would turn to another religion.

11. Fifthly the judge erred by failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  a
    material finding of fact, in concluding that Facebook evidence was self-
    serving and unreliable.

Permission to Appeal

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Keane of  the  FtT.   It  was
    found that

         "Largely, the grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement  with
         the findings of the judge, an attempt to  reargue  the  appeal  and
         they did not disclose an arguable error or errors of  law  but  for
         which the outcome of the appeal might have been different."

13. However Judge Keane found arguable errors of law at paragraph 26 of the
    judge's decision.  It was arguable that the judge took into account  an
    irrelevant consideration in relation  to  the  Appellant's  very  basic
    knowledge of Christianity, and in finding that it was incredible that a
    person who had lost faith in the religion in which they were born  into
    would turn to another religion, knowing only the basics of what the new
    religion stands for.  Judge Keane found that  in  characterising  those
    two aspects as incredible, the  judge  attached  weight  to  irrelevant
    considerations.  Solely in the respect of those two matters, did  Judge
    Keane find an arguable error of law.

14. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the judge had given valid and sustainable  reasons
    for rejecting the Appellant's account and had not materially  erred  in
    law.

My Analysis and Conclusions

15. At the oral hearing Mr Greer submitted that the judge had erred for the
    reasons given in the grant of permission.  The judge  had  applied  his
    own view of what was reasonable which was an  error  of  law.   It  was
    submitted that the judge had displayed an inbuilt incredibility at  the
    very beginning of his consideration of the  claimed  conversion,  which
    was wrong in law, and had infected his other findings.

16. With respect to the Appellant's knowledge, the judge did  not  set  out
    what level of knowledge he expected an individual to  have.   In  depth
    knowledge of Christianity is not required.

17. Mr McVeety relied upon the rule 24  response,  pointing  out  that  the
    Appellant had indicated that he had converted to  Christianity  because
    of tolerance, which conflicted directly with the views of the church he
    had joined in relation to homosexuality,  which  that  church  did  not
    accept.

18. I find no material error of law disclosed in the FtT decision  for  the
    following reasons.

19. The challenges made to the FtT decision relate in the main to paragraph
    26.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that   the   Appellant's
    credibility was damaged, not just because he  displayed  a  very  basic
    knowledge of Christianity during his asylum interview.  The judge noted
    that the Appellant claimed to have converted to Christianity in  August
    2017 and that he first knew of  Christianity  when  introduced  by  his
    friend towards the end of 2016.  The judge found  (paragraph  24)  that
    the Appellant had claimed in  his  asylum  interview  that  he  had  an
    interest in Christianity from the end  of  2016,  that  developed  into
    specific learning about Christianity over a nine or ten month period.

20. The judge noted that a witness who attended from the church in  the  UK
    described meeting the Appellant in February  2018,  and  described  his
    knowledge of Christianity as "basic" and when  asked  to  clarify  that
    response replied that the Appellant was "not  very  knowledgeable.   He
    knew basic  details  like  praying  and  love  but  not  more  intimate
    details."  The judge noted that the church witness  said  he  had  been
    told by the Appellant that he had attended a house church  in  Iran  on
    four or five occasions, though the Appellant's own evidence was that he
    had attended the house church approximately twenty times.

21. In my view the judge was entitled to  find  that  the  basic  knowledge
    displayed by the Appellant in his  asylum  interview,  was  incredible,
    "given the level of contact the  Appellant  claims  to  have  had  with
    Christians in the house church in Iran".  This finding was made by  the
    judge at paragraph 26.

22. Ground 4, which contends the judge acted perversely, makes reference to
    an incorrect paragraph number in the FtT decision, and does not set out
    what the judge actually found.  It was contended  that  the  judge  had
    acted perversely by finding it incredible that a person  who  has  lost
    faith in the religion  they  were  born  into  would  turn  to  another
    religion.  This is  not  the  conclusion  reached  by  the  judge.   At
    paragraph 26 the judge found "It is also incredible that a  person  who
    has lost faith in the religion  they  were  born  into  would  turn  to
    another religion and risk their and their  family  members  lives  when
    knowing only the basics of what the new religion stands for."

23. The above is not a perverse decision.  The judge was entitled  to  make
    such a finding, on the basis that the Appellant had failed  to  explain
    why he had converted to Christianity in Iran, which  would  potentially
    risk his life, and affect the lives of family  members,  when  he  knew
    only the basics of the new religion.

24. The judge was entitled to note  the  views  of  the  church  which  the
    Appellant had joined in the  UK.   At  paragraph  29  the  judge  notes
    evidence  that  homosexual  activity  is   inconsistent   with   church
    membership, and the view was expressed  that  where  a  member  of  the
    congregation is publicly promoting such behaviour, "there is a case for
    more stringent disciplinary action."  The judge was entitled to find it
    incredible, that if the Appellant's motive for turning to  Christianity
    was to find a religion which was more open and compassionate,  that  he
    would  have  joined  a  church  which  was  so  obviously  opposed   to
    homosexuality.  The judge recorded at paragraph 29 that  the  Appellant
    was in fact asked whether he knew the views of the church he had joined
    in relation to homosexuality and he said he did not.

25. In my view the judge was entitled at paragraph 30 to conclude that  the
    Appellant had failed to provide "a logical reason as to  why  he  would
    suddenly become interested in adopting  a  different  religion  in  the
    knowledge that if discovered he could be killed  by  the  authorities."
    The judge was  also  entitled  to  find  in  that  paragraph  that  the
    Appellant's claim to return to Christianity primarily  because  of  its
    teachings on compassion and forgiveness was  not  consistent  with  his
    church of choice in the UK.

26. The judge did not err by failing to  apply  the  HJ  (Iran)  principles
    because the judge did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  genuinely
    converted to Christianity.

27. Regarding Facebook,  the  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  38  that  the
    Appellant's representative  conceded  that  Facebook  accounts  can  be
    manipulated to give the appearance that  events  have  been  posted  on
    specific dates when they have not,  and  can  also  be  removed  almost
    immediately after posting.

28. The decision of the FtT does not disclose that the judge has  made  any
    findings which could be categorised as  perverse  or  irrational.   The
    judge has not neglected to consider  material  evidence,  and  has  not
    taken into account irrelevant evidence.

29. In my view the judge has carefully  and  comprehensively  examined  the
    Appellant's account,  and  reached  conclusions  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence, and provided  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  those
    conclusions.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.  This
direction is made because the Appellant has made a claim  for  international
protection.


Signed                              Date 21st March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 21st March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
