
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/11680/2016
                                                               PA/11659/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 23 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                  yasir [j]
                                 nosheen [j]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E. Fripp, instructed by Lester Dominic
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellants are nationals of Pakistan and  claim  to  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on the ground of being Ahmadis.   They  are
    brother and sister and both have a  considerable  immigration  history:
    their claims were first made in 2008.  They were separately refused and
    separately appealed against the refusal.  Each of them was unsuccessful
    and their appeal rights were exhausted in 2011.    Further  submissions
    were made and, following judicial review proceedings, decisions,  still
    refusing the claims but carrying rights of  appeal,  were  made  on  28
    September and 29 September 2016 respectively.  The appellants  appealed
    against those decisions.  Their appeals were dismissed by Judge Beg  in
    the First-tier Tribunal  in  a  decision  sent  out  on  13  May  2017.
    Applications for permission to appeal were refused  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  The Upper  Tribunal's  refusals  were
    challenged by judicial review.  On 6 March 2019,  whilst  the  judicial
    reviews were before the High Court, the Court of Appeal  gave  judgment
    WA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  302.   The  grounds  of  judicial
    review were amended, with permission; and Lieven J  granted  permission
    for judicial review.  Following the usual  Cart  procedure,  the  Upper
    Tribunal's refusals of permission were quashed and, re-determining  the
    applications, the Vice President granted permission.

 2. Mr Fripp's submission to us was that these appeals were now  so  simple
    that  they  could  be  readily  determined  by  the   Upper   Tribunal.
    Subsequent submissions,  however,  and  his  application  to  submit  a
    considerable quantity of new evidence, suggested a level of  complexity
    which his primary submission did not appear to recognise.  Mr Bramble's
    submission was that, bearing in mind the fact that the appellants  have
    not been regarded as credible in their previous appeals,  it  was  very
    unlikely that a further Tribunal hearing would assist them.

 3. WA (Pakistan) sets out in paragraph [16] the  questions  that  a  judge
    determining an Ahmadi appeal needs to ask.  In that  case,  as  in  the
    present appeals, the questions posed by the Court of Appeal,  the  last
    in particular, have never been asked or answered.  In WA (Pakistan) the
    Court of Appeal regarded it as  axiomatic  that  the  appeal  would  be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for re-determination: see the  last
    sentence of paragraph [63].

 4. In our judgment that is the appropriate disposal of these appeals also.
     Following the process set out in WA (Pakistan) will require new  fact-
    finding, and new analysis of the facts  found.   The  new  material  is
    likely to be so extensive that remittal  is  appropriate,  quite  apart
    from the clear guidance given by WA (Pakistan) itself.

 5. The judgment of the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  for  failure  to
    follow the procedure now set out in WA (Pakistan).  We  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Beg.   We  direct  the  appellants'  appeals  be  re-
    determined in the First-tier Tribunal.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 21 August 2019
