


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/11517/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31 July 2019                         |On 8 August 2019                      |
|                                        |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    H T H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr J Howard of Fountain solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary but  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Boylan-Kemp  MBE  promulgated  on  16  January  2019,  which
dismissed the Appellant's appeal.



Background


3. The Appellant was born on 12 October 1986 and is a national of  Iraq.  On
21 September 2018 the respondent refused the appellant's protection claim

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Boylan-Kemp MBE ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal. Grounds of  appeal
were lodged and  on  14  March  2019  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  granted
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. Ground 1: It is arguable, on the basis of  the  grounds,  that  the
      Judge erred in law by failing to  take  into  account  the  supporting
      evidence in a witness statement at page 28  of  the  bundle.  At  this
      stage, it is arguable that this was material but  the  materiality  of
      any error will need to be established.


      3. Ground 2: It is also arguable that the  Judge  may  not  have  been
      entitled to give the weight that he  did  it  to  a  newspaper  report
      relied on by the respondent which - so far as the grounds contend -  a
      full copy of which was not put in evidence. It is  arguable  that  its
      reliability was not established. This, together with its  materiality,
      will need to be explored at the hearing.


      4. For these reasons, permission to appeal is granted

The Hearing

5. (a) The appellant Mr Howard moved the grounds of appeal. He  took  me  to
[18] of the decision. There, the Judge says

      The only extra evidence is a letter from his cousin

Mr Howard told me that that is wrong. In the appellant's bundle there  is  a
statement from Donya Raouf Abdullah.  Mr  Howard  told  me  that  the  Judge
failed to consider that statement and so  ignored  a  crucial  part  of  the
evidence.

(b) Mr Howard told me that the Judge erred in law in his consideration of  a
newspaper article from the Kurdistan Tribune referred to by  the  respondent
at paragraph 55 of the reasons for refusal letter. At [21] the Judge  places
reliance on a newspaper article even though it  is  not  disputed  that  the
newspaper article was not before the court.  The  Judge  concludes  [21]  by
saying

            ...there is little reason for me to doubt the accuracy  of  this
      information

Mr Howard told me that the primary source of evidence  was  not  before  the
Judge and the Judge does not adequately explain why he places weight  on  an
assertion made by the respondent.

(c) Mr Howard asked me to set the decision aside and remit this case to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a hearing of new.

6. For the respondent, Mrs Aboni told me that the decision does not  contain
errors of law. She told me that the Judge correctly directed himself in  law
and made findings well within the range of reasonable findings. She told  me
that the Judge gives adequate reasons for rejecting the  appellant's  claim.
Mrs Aboni told me  that  the  Kurdistan  Tribune  article  (referred  to  at
paragraph 55 of the reasons for refusal letter) is properly referenced,  and
that the Judge gives adequate reasons  for  relying  on  that  article.  Mrs
Aboni asked me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7.  At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, it was said that  "Where
a tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence,  a  reviewing  body
should be very slow to conclude that that tribunal overlooked  some  factor,
simply  because  the  factor  is  not  explicitly   referred   to   in   the
determination concerned". McCombe LJ  in  VW(Sri  Lanka)  C5/2012/3037  said
"Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,  when  a
First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  given  a  judgment  explaining  why  he  has
reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow out industriously  areas
of evidence that have been less fully dealt with than  others  and  then  to
use this as a basis for  saying  the  judge's  decision  is  legally  flawed
because it did not  deal  with  a  particular  matter  more  fully.   In  my
judgment, with respect, that is no  basis  on  which  to  sustain  a  proper
challenge to a judge's finding of fact"

8. At [8] of the decision the Judge lists the evidence that  he  considered.
He lists four items - including the appellant's  436  page  bundle  and  the
oral evidence of the appellant. The appellant's  436  page  bundle  contains
the witness statement of Donya Raouf Abdullah. Mr Howard  told  me  that  Ms
Abdullah did not attend the hearing and did not  give  evidence.  The  Judge
says he considered 436 pages of  documentary  evidence.  There  is  no  good
reason for me to go behind what the Judge says at [8] of the decision.

9. It would have been helpful if the Judge mentioned Ms  Abdullah's  witness
statement at [18], but he clearly says at [8] that he has considered it.

10. The second ground of appeal relates to  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
reference to an article from the Kurdistan Tribune at paragraph  55  of  the
reasons for refusal letter. Mr Howard  focused  on  [21]  of  the  decision.
There, the Judge (perhaps carelessly) says that there is  little  reason  to
doubt the accuracy of what is said in the reasons for refusal  letter.  Even
if the last 14 words of the  paragraph  are  deleted,  the  paragraph  would
still make sense.  What  the  Judge  is  saying  is  that  the  respondent's
information is properly referenced, and all parties have had fair notice  of
the newspaper article.

11. At [22] the Judge rejects the appellant's account, but goes  on  to  say
that even if what the appellant says is true, there  would  be  no  risk  on
return because background information indicates that Dana Majid, the  former
governor of Sulaymaniyah, has had his conviction quashed  and  has  returned
to Sulaymaniyah.

12. The foundation of the  appellant's  protection  claim  is  that  he  was
closely associated as secretary to Dana Majid. Dana Majid is  a  significant
political figure.  Dana Majid had  a  sentence  of  six  years  imprisonment
quashed and he then deemed it safe to return  to  Sulaymaniyah.  At  [21]  &
[22] of the decision the Judge reasons that if a leader of the  Goran  party
is safe in IKR, then there can be no risk  to  the  appellant  if  he  is  a
member of the Goran party or an employee of Dana Majid.

13. It must be remembered that the Judge's primary finding is summarized  at
[19], where the Judge rejects the appellant's account. What the  Judge  says
at [21] and [22] are findings in the alternative.

14.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

15. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied  the
correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all  of
the evidence. There is nothing unfair in the procedure adopted  nor  in  the
manner in which the evidence was considered. There  is  nothing  wrong  with
the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  The  appellant  might  not  like  the
conclusion that the Judge arrived at, but that conclusion is the  result  of
the correctly applied legal equation. The  correct  test  in  law  has  been
applied. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

16.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

17.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 16 January 2019, stands.

Signed
                   Date 5 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
