
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11362/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 June 2019                      |On 13 June 2019                      |
|Extempore decision                            |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     p p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr U Sheikh, Solicitor from Ansar


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the Appellant in this matter as
    the Secretary of State and to P P as the Claimant.

 2. It is a challenge by the Secretary of State to the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Dineen ("the judge"), promulgated on 11 April 2019,
    in which he allowed the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 3 October 2017, which in turn had  refused  her  protection
    and human rights claims.

 3. The Claimant's case was essentially put forward on the following bases.
     First, that she is a transgender woman  and  had  suffered  particular
    problems in Thailand. Second, that  she  had  been  trafficked  to  the
    United Kingdom and forced to work in the sex industry in  this  country
    and would on return to Thailand be at risk of  being  re-trafficked  or
    forced to work in the sex industry there. Third, that her inability  to
    be formally recognised as  a  woman  in  Thailand  was  a  sufficiently
    serious breach of her protected Article 8 rights as to justify  success
    in her claim.

 4. The judge in effect accepted that the Claimant  was  credible  and  had
    indeed been trafficked to the United Kingdom.  He  concluded  that  she
    would be at risk on return to Thailand because of  particular  societal
    discrimination which either in combination with his conclusion that she
    would need to work as a sex worker, or that work being a result of  the
    discrimination, would place her at risk of persecution.  The judge also
    concluded that because the Claimant would be unable to have her  gender
    recognised under Thai law, this would in of itself breach her Article 8
    rights.  Finally, the judge concluded  that  in  respect  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules,  the  inability  to  have  her
    gender  recognised  under  law  would  constitute   "very   significant
    obstacles" to her reintegration into the society of that country.

 5. The Secretary of State put forward  grounds  which  in  essence  assert
    that: the judge had failed to provide any or any  adequate  reasons  in
    respect of material matters; that he had reversed the burden of  proof;
    had failed to take relevant evidence into account; had failed  to  deal
    with issues arising under section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimant's, etc) Act 2004; and had failed  to  adequately
    explain why the Claimant's Article 8 rights would be  breached  by  her
    return to Thailand.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson on 7 May 2019.

 7. Prior to the hearing before me, Mr Sheikh provided a detailed  Rule  24
    response.

 8. At the hearing Mr Kotas relied on the Secretary of State's  grounds  of
    appeal and made a number of additional points arising therefrom.

 9. Mr Sheikh relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that whilst some
    of the reasons provided by the judge were somewhat limited  in  nature,
    they were sufficient in the context of this particular case.  The judge
    had been entitled to find that the Claimant was a victim of trafficking
    and would be at risk on return to Thailand as a result of that.

10. In respect of the Article 8 issue, Mr Sheikh  submitted  that  although
    the test was one of "flagrant  denial"  or  "gross  violation"  of  the
    Claimant's  Article  8  rights,  her  inability  to  have  her   gender
    recognised under Thai law was sufficient for  her  to  have  succeeded.
    This was the case notwithstanding the  fact  that  the  judge  had  not
    specifically addressed the relevant threshold set out in cases such  as
    Ullah [204] UKHL 26

11. In reply, Mr Kotas emphasised the fact that the flagrant of denial test
    represents a very high threshold and it was simply not  enough  in  the
    judge's decision to have  justified  a  conclusion  that  that  it  was
    reached in this case.



Decision on error of law

12. This has not been an  easy  case  to  decide  but  taking  the  judge's
    decision as a whole and reading it with appropriate care and  attention
    and in light  of  the  submissions  made  by  both  representatives,  I
    conclude that there are material errors of law.  My  reasons  for  this
    conclusion are as follows.

13. I do have some concerns about the judge having potentially reversed the
    burden of proof at paragraph 43, but it may  be  said  that  the  first
    sentence of that paragraph is sustainable  if  one  were  to  take  the
    position  that  he  regarded  the  Claimant's  evidence  as   generally
    credible.  There is merit  in  Mr  Sheikh's  submission  that  the  NRM
    reasonable grounds decision represented at least some support  for  the
    Claimant's claim to have been trafficked.

14. However, even if one were to put these issues to one side, there is  in
    my view a very real issue as to the judge's failure to have  considered
    matters within the scope of section 8 of the 2004  Act,  in  particular
    the undisputed fact that the Claimant had raised the trafficking  issue
    only after the Secretary of State's decision  refusing  her  protection
    and human rights claims.  The judge has simply failed to  address  this
    matter of contention.

15. Even if the section 8 point did not constitute an error, or at least  a
    material error, in my view paragraph 46 of the decision  represents  an
    inadequate assessment of the issue of risk on return as that related to
    the trafficking issue.

16. There are perhaps two potential readings of paragraph 46.  First,  that
    it was a combination of societal discrimination and a finding (which  I
    am bound to say is unsupported by any reasons) that the Claimant  would
    have needed to work in the sex industry  on  return  to  Thailand  that
    would have led to a risk of persecution (one assumes on  the  basis  of
    there being a risk of re-trafficking, although that is not spelt  out).
    The other reading is that the societal discrimination would have led to
    the need to work in the sex industry and that work would  have  led  to
    the same ultimate outcome.  On either basis, in my view the  judge  has
    failed to provide adequate reasoning as to the nature and level of  the
    societal discrimination and why (on the assumption  that  the  Claimant
    would have worked as a sex worker on return) that would of itself  have
    placed her at risk of  being  re-trafficked  or  would  otherwise  have
    placed into a situation of risk for any other reason.

17. On the country information that was before the judge it is clear enough
    that there was evidence going both ways on the issue of discrimination.
     Some materials were suggesting that as a matter of  practical  reality
    transgender people, whilst suffering a degree of discrimination,  could
    lead reasonable lives, and other evidence indicated that the  situation
    may have been more difficult than that.  In any event, the judge has in
    my view failed to deal with  the  risk  assessment  in  a  sufficiently
    detailed manner.

18. I then turn to the issue of Article 8.  Despite  the  judge  apparently
    considering aspects of the country  information  on  the  basis  of  an
    assessment of persecution, the reality is that he in  fact  focused  on
    the inability of a transgender person in Thailand to have their  gender
    formally recognised under the law of that country and how this  related
    to Article 8.

19. The judge's conclusion, as expressed in paragraphs 50 and 51, was  that
    this inability  in  and  of  itself  constituted  a  violation  of  the
    Claimant's Article  8  rights  and  was  sufficient  for  her  to  have
    succeeded in her appeal on that basis alone.  The difficulty with  this
    conclusion is that the claim put forward engaged the "flagrant  denial"
    test as elucidated in Ullah. This is because the argument  concerned  a
    "foreign case" scenario: in other words  the  violation  said  to  take
    place would have occurred in Thailand, not in the United Kingdom.   The
    threshold is a high one  and  required  appropriate  consideration  and
    reasoning.

20. For his part Mr Sheikh, who I may say has argued  the  Claimant's  case
    with  skill  and  professionalism,  suggested  that  the   unchallenged
    evidence relating to Thai law was enough of itself  to  show  that  the
    appeal would have succeeded, notwithstanding any  deficiencies  in  the
    judge's own evaluation.

21. I would respectively disagree. In my view Mr Kotas  was  right  to  say
    that the matter is not sufficiently clear cut for me to arrive at  that
    conclusion.  There is merit in Mr Sheikh's submission, but on the other
    hand there are clear arguments going the other way.  To that  extent  I
    would conclude that the judge's error on this issue is material.

22. The final point relates to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In my view the judge has erred in concluding that the  Claimant
    was able to show "very significant obstacles" purely on  the  basis  of
    the legal prohibition of formal gender recognition in  Thailand.   This
    paragraph of the Rules requires what has been  described  as  a  "broad
    evaluative judgment", involving subjective and objective  issues  (see,
    for example, Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813).  It goes  wider  than  simply
    formal legal provisions present in the country of return.  On the facts
    of this particular case, there were a number of matters  which  on  the
    face of it would appear to go against the Claimant's  assertion  as  to
    the existence of such obstacles.  The  judge  has  failed  to  consider
    matters in the round when setting out his conclusion in paragraph 52.

23. For the above reasons, I set the judge's decision aside.



Disposal

24. With reference to para 7.2 of the Practice Statement,  I  have  decided
    that this appeal must be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing. The Claimant's case has a number of strands to it and  there
    will need to be careful and fairly extensive fact-finding undertaken.

25. I am expressly preserving one finding, namely that the  Claimant  is  a
    transgender woman.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

    1. This appeal is remitted and shall not be reheard  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Dineen;




    2. The finding that P P is a transgender woman is preserved.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 12 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



