
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11313/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 March 2018                          |On 06 April 2018                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    E. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria who entered the UK  lawfully  in
    2008 with a grant of entry clearance  as  the  dependent  spouse  of  a
    student. She was accompanied by her  three  children.  Their  leave  to
    remain expired on 14 November 2013, and they have remained  in  the  UK
    unlawfully since.

 2. The Appellant's husband is said to have left  the  UK  for  Nigeria  in
    January 2014, having withdrawn an appeal  against  the  refusal  of  an
    application to vary  his  own  leave  in  the  capacity  of  a  Tier  1
    Entrepreneur. In withdrawing his appeal he requested the Respondent and
    the  Tribunal  should  remove  his  wife  and  children   to   Nigeria.
    Nonetheless the Appellant and the children  remained  in  the  UK,  and
    insisted on pursuing their own appeals against the decision  to  refuse
    to vary the leave to remain previously granted to the family. (They had
    sought such leave as his dependents.) They pursued their  appeals  only
    on Article 8 grounds, advancing no protection claim. Their appeals were
    dismissed on all grounds by  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fisher  promulgated  on  24  April  2014.  His  decision  records   the
    Appellant's stance as being that she  did  not  wish  the  children  to
    return to Nigeria because she preferred them to be educated in the UK -
    albeit that would mean education at public expense for individuals  who
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. Although  she
    was not divorced, she claimed that her marriage was over, but  she  did
    not allege that either she or the children faced any risk  of  harm  in
    the event of return to Nigeria at the hands of either her  husband,  or
    any other individuals. It is clear from his decision that Judge  Fisher
    concluded the Appellant had not told him the truth, that  her  marriage
    was not at an end, that her aim was simply to secure medical  treatment
    for herself and her children,  and,  education  for  her  children,  at
    public expense.

 3. On 30 March 2016 the Appellant advanced an asylum claim  asserting  for
    the first time that  if  removed  to  Nigeria  her  daughter  would  be
    subjected to FGM, by her husband and his family. That claim was refused
    on 2 October 2016, and her appeal against that refusal came before  the
    First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 29 September 2017, when it  was
    heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heatherington.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed on asylum grounds in a  decision  promulgated  on  3  October
    2017. Judge Heatherington noted the Appellant's admission that she  had
    not been subjected to FGM, and her admission that although  the  Family
    Court had been persuaded to grant an FGM Protection  Order  on  16  May
    2016, no attempt had been made to produce that  Order  to  the  Supreme
    Court in Abuja for  enforcement,  or  to  obtain  a  mirror  order.  He
    rejected as untrue the Appellant's evidence that such a  risk  of  harm
    existed. The appeal was however allowed on Article 8 grounds.

 4. The Appellant has not sought to appeal  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal  on  protection  grounds.  The  Respondent's   application   for
    permission to appeal the decision to allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds was granted  by  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  on  21
    November 2017 on all of the grounds advanced.  Thus  the  matter  comes
    before me.

 5. Both parties are agreed before me that the passage within  the  Judge's
    decision that deals with the Article 8 appeal is extremely brief. There
    is no reference to any of the relevant  jurisprudence,  and  thus  both
    parties agree that the decision must be read to see if it  demonstrates
    that the Judge had in mind, and applied, the  correct  principles.  The
    Respondent's argument in brief is that  although  the  Judge  correctly
    looks at the "best  interests"  of  the  children  he  treats  them  as
    determinative of the appeal, and indeed the only factor he is  required
    to consider. Although section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is quoted in full
    within the decision [8.12], the text that  accompanies  that  quotation
    within the same paragraph is a self direction that is manifestly wrong.
    Thus it is argued that the Judge appears to be unaware of the  guidance
    to be found (for example) in  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public
    interest interface) [2017] UKUT 14, or, MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    705, and his decision fails to demonstrate that  he  had  in  mind,  or
    applied, the principles set out therein.

 6. Whilst Ms Brakaj felt unable to concede the Respondent's criticisms, in
    my judgement she had no answer to them. Her difficulties  in  defending
    the decision simply served to highlight its deficiencies.  For  my  own
    part I am satisfied that the decision in  relation  to  the  Article  8
    appeal is fatally flawed, and that it must be set aside and remade.

 7. I have considered whether the decision should be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, but the re-hearing could not  proceed  immediately  and  thus
    would require adjournment in any event. Moreover, in circumstances such
    as this, where by reason of the brevity of the decision it would appear
    that the relevant evidence concerning the family's  true  position  has
    not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect  of
    that error of law has been to deprive the parties  of  the  opportunity
    for their case to be properly considered by the  First  Tier  Tribunal;
    paragraph 7.2(a)  of  the  Practice  Statement  of  13  November  2014.
    Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise  required  is
    such that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate
    that the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

 8. To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing  by  a  judge  other
    than Judge Heatherington  at  the  North  Shields  Hearing  Centre.  No
    interpreter is required.

Notice of decision

 9. The decision upon the Article 8 appeal promulgated on  3  October  2017
    did involve the making of an error of law  sufficient  to  require  the
    decision to be  set  aside  and  reheard.  Accordingly  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  de  novo  of  the
    Article 8 ground of appeal, with the directions set out above.

10. The decision upon the asylum, humanitarian protection,  and  Article  3
    grounds discloses no error of law. The decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    on those grounds is confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
