
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11742/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision issued            |
|on 25th October 2018                       |on 8th November 2018       |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                  ANJUM [S]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal A M S Green dismissing an appeal on protection grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He was born into and brought
      up by a Christian family.  He claimed to be facing blasphemy
      proceedings in Pakistan.

   3. The judge was not satisfied that the appellant is a practising
      Christian.  The judge found there was no evidence the blasphemy suit
      was being actively pursued.  The judge had concerns about the
      reliability of the document, termed a Private Complaint, initiating
      the blasphemy proceedings and gave it little weight.  The judge was
      not satisfied that the appellant would not have sufficient protection
      from the authorities in Pakistan and, if necessary, would not be able
      to relocate internally.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable
      that the judge did not give adequate reasons for his decision, having
      regard, in particular, to the country information together with the
      respondent's acceptance that the appellant is a Christian and that the
      Private Complaint initiating the blasphemy proceedings is genuine.

   5. At the hearing before me the parties accepted that the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.  According to Mr Govan the judge
      had not made clear findings at paragraph 19 of the decision in
      relation to the blasphemy charge.  The Private Complaint initiating
      blasphemy proceedings was accepted by the respondent as genuine.  The
      judge did not properly consider the potential consequences stemming
      from this document.

   6. Mr Winter also referred to paragraph 19 of the decision.  He drew
      attention to documentary evidence of a number of interlocutors made by
      the court in Pakistan in the blasphemy case, together with
      translations.  The judge erred in saying at paragraph 19 there was no
      evidence the case was being actively pursued.  It was accepted that
      this was a genuine blasphemy case and that the appellant is a
      Christian.  In terms of the guidance in AK and SK (Christians: risk)
      Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569 the appeal should be allowed.  There was
      no viable internal relocation alternative.

   7. It was further observed that the appellant had given his religion as
      Christian in his passport.  The judge did not appear to have taken any
      account of this.

   8. For the respondent Mr Govan sought remittal of the appeal to the First-
      tier Tribunal for further findings on whether the events narrated by
      the appellant had taken place.  For my part I was not satisfied that
      remittal was necessary or appropriate, given the available evidence
      and the extent to which this was accepted by the parties.  I informed
      Mr Govan that I would adjourn the hearing till later in the day so he
      would have the opportunity of preparing a submission on the merits of
      the appeal.

   9. The hearing reconvened later the same day for the purpose of re-making
      the decision.  Mr Govan observed that the appellant is a Christian and
      the blasphemy Complaint was accepted as genuine.  The interlocutors
      from the blasphemy proceedings had not been challenged.  In term of
      the country guideline case of AK and SK the appellant was facing a
      risk of persecution.  Mr Winter made no further submission.

  10. The position is that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
      by not giving adequate reasons for finding the appellant was not at
      risk of persecution and, in particular, that the blasphemy proceedings
      were not being actively pursued. The judge does not appear to have
      properly engaged with the evidence in relation to the interlocutors in
      the blasphemy proceedings and as to the appellant's religion as
      recorded in his passport.

  11. Even though the judge was not impressed by the appellant's lack of
      knowledge of Christianity and was not satisfied he practised his
      faith, the appellant is a Christian by family origin and describes
      himself as such in his passport.  The appellant is perceived as a
      Christian in Pakistan, where he is subject to an active prosecution
      for blasphemy.  On this basis his appeal should succeed on protection
      grounds, in terms of AK and SK.


Conclusions

  12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the
      making of an error of law.

  13. The decision is set aside.

  14. The decision is re-made by allowing the appeal.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity and I see no
reason of substance for making such a direction.


Fee award           (N.B. This is not part of the decision)
As no fee has been paid or is payable no fee award is made.




M E Deans
                               31st October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

