
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11617/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 24th June 2019                    |On 2nd July 2019                     |
|Given extempore                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

                                  ZRYAN [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel instructed by Broudie Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  She claims to have arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 5th July, 2018 clandestinely and  made  a  claim  for
    asylum on 5th July that year to the respondent.  The respondent refused
    the appellant's claim and the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal came for hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mark Davies at  Manchester  Piccadilly  on  31st  October,  2018.   The
    appellant gave oral evidence to the judge and adopted as  part  of  her
    evidence a witness statement she had previously made.

2.   During cross-examination she claimed that she had left Iraq  with  Kawa
    Mahmood her boyfriend,  in  the  company  of  an  agent  and  they  had
    travelled to Turkey.  However, she became separated from her  boyfriend
    in Turkey because at the time she was pregnant and had had an abortion.
     It appears that she then corrected her evidence and claimed  that  she
    had suffered a miscarriage.  When she returned to where  she  had  been
    staying with her boyfriend she discovered that he was missing.  She was
    asked why she had said that she had an abortion  and  replied  that  it
    could have been her mistake.  She spent two nights in hospital but  was
    not able to provide any written form of evidence to confirm that.

3.   She was asked whether she had asked the agent  if  he  knew  where  her
    boyfriend had gone and she said simply "they took  some  of  the  males
    separately".  When asked if she had contact details of  the  agent  the
    appellant was evasive.  He  does  not  explain  in  what  way  she  was
    evasive.  The judge noted that she said she did not have a mobile phone
    but her boyfriend did although he had lost it in Turkey.  She was asked
    if she had asked the agent where they had taken her boyfriend  and  she
    simply replied that she  had.   He  said  that  they  had,  "taken  him
    somewhere and is waiting for you there".  When  asked  where  somewhere
    was she said, "I am not familiar with Turkey".  The appellant was asked
    the name of the place where her boyfriend was taken to and said  "I  do
    not know and when I went there he was not there".

4.   At paragraph 56 the judge's first finding he finds that  the  appellant
    has not been a truthful witness.  At paragraph 57  he  finds  that  the
    appellant has fabricated her evidence in its totality.  At paragraph 60
    he found  that  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  separated  from  her
    boyfriend in Turkey  was  wholly  incredible.   He  said  "taking  into
    account that she has not told me the truth I believe it was  reasonably
    likely that she never had a boyfriend and thus never left Iraq and went
    to Turkey with him.  Even if the appellant did  have  a  boyfriend  and
    went with him to Turkey.  She has given no credible explanation  as  to
    the circumstances in which they separated.

5.   Mr Tan drew my attention to paragraph 61 in which the manner  in  which
    the appellant answered questions in cross-examination was described  by
    the judge as being wholly incredible.  At paragraph 61 he  went  on  to
    say "she claims she was hospitalised  and  when  she  returned  to  the
    address where she had been living with her boyfriend she  was  told  he
    had been sent away somewhere and she would meet him later in this place
    at a later date".  She was not able to give me any  information  as  to
    where this place was and was evasive in cross-examination.

6.   With very great respect to the judge, it is hardly surprising that  she
    was not able to give any information to him as to where this place  was
    because that she was in  a  strange  country  and  did  not  speak  the
    language.  She was wholly dependent upon an agent.  There appears to be
    nothing in  what  the  judge  says  about  having  separated  from  her
    boyfriend in Turkey to be "wholly incredible".

7.   I have concluded that the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mark Davies cannot stand. I set it aside. Whilst  clear  findings  have
    been made they are wholly inadequately reasoned.  It is  necessary  for
    clear findings to be made  properly  supported  by  clear  and  logical
    reasons.  The matter will be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh before a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Davies a Kurdish Sorani speaking interpreter will be required and three
    hours should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.


Richard Chalkley                                 Date
Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley                          28th   June   2019




