
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12609/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 January 2020                 |On 05 February 2020                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     A K
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk (counsel) instructed by Kalsi
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, because this is a protection claim and  to  preserve
the anonymity direction deemed necessary by the First tier Tribunal.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith promulgated on 17 June 2019, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 01/01/1997 and is a  national  of  Afghanistan.
On 17/10/2018 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  Lloyd-Smith  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  24  July  2019
First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bulpitt  granted  permission  to  appeal  stating
inter alia

      3. It is arguable that the Judge has fallen into the error  identified
      at [24] of Mibanga v SSHD (2005) EWCA Civ 367. At [41] of her decision
      the Judge says that when considering the medical  diagnosis  she  must
      take into consideration her credibility findings. It  is  arguable  in
      view of this comment that the Judge has reached her conclusion on  the
      appellant's credibility before considering the medical evidence  about
      him.


      4. It is also arguable that the Judge has fallen into error by failing
      to consider whether, given his particular  characteristics,  including
      his mental health diagnosis, the appellant could relocate to Kabul.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr Schwenk moved the grounds of  appeal.  He  told
me that the Judge had  taken  an  incorrect  approach  to  the  totality  of
evidence. He said that the Judge failed to consider the medical evidence  in
the round, and so fell into the error discussed in  Mibanga  v  SSHD  (2005)
EWCA Civ 367. He took me to [41] of  the  decision  and  told  me  that  the
second sentence of [41] is plainly an error. He told me  that  between  [23]
and [40] of  the  decision  the  Judge  makes  credibility  findings  before
turning to the medical evidence at [41], where, he said,  the  Judge  looked
at the  medical  evidence  through  the  lens  of  the  adverse  credibility
findings she has already made.

(b) Mr Schwenk told me that the Judge made a further material error  of  law
because she did not take account of  the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note
No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance,  and
failed to identify the appellant as a vulnerable witness.  Mr  Schwenk  took
me through the psychiatric report relied on by the appellant and  emphasised
the diagnosis of complex PTSD. He referred me to  AM  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
[2017] EWCA Civ 1123.


(c)  Mr  Schwenk  told  me  that  the  Judge's  consideration  of   internal
relocation is inadequate. Even  though  the  Judge  took  guidance  from  AS
(safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2018]  UKUT  00118,  the  Judge  did  not
consider the appellant's mental illness,  nor  other  factors  such  as  the
appellant's lack of education, the language he speaks (Pashtu) and his  lack
of a support network when considering whether or not relocation to Kabul  is
a viable option for the appellant.

(d) Mr Schwenk told me that the Judge's treatment of the  expert  report  is
inadequate. He told me that the decision contains  material  errors  of  law
and asked me to set the decision aside.

6. (a) For the respondent, Mr  Tan  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors, material or otherwise. He took me to [9]  and  [14]  of  the
decision, and told me that,  there,  the  Judge  makes  it  clear  that  she
considers all of the evidence, including the  medical  evidence  and  expert
report, before reaching conclusions. He told me that what is  said  at  [23]
is an introduction summarising the Judge's findings  before  discussing  the
reason for making those findings. He told me that  the  Judge  unambiguously
states that she has considered the medical expert evidence  before  reaching
conclusions. He  reminded  me  that  there  are  many  findings  within  the
decision which are not challenged by the appellant.

(b) Mr Tan moved to the second  ground  of  appeal  and  told  me  that  the
grounds of appeal do not raise issues about the impact  of  the  appellant's
vulnerability. He took me to [7] of the decision  where  the  Judge  records
that the appellant was able to participate in the hearing.

(c) Mr Tan told me that the Judge's  treatment  of  internal  relocation  is
flawless and that at [43] the Judge  reached  conclusions  well  within  the
range of conclusions available to her. He told me that the  Judge  carefully
considers the experts report before  analysing  the  viability  of  internal
relocation.

(d) Mr Tan resisted the appeal in its entirety. He urged me to  dismiss  the
appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. In Ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469, it was held that it  is  wrong  to
use adverse credibility findings as a basis for rejecting  medical  evidence
without first considering the medical evidence  itself.  That  too  was  the
view of the Court of Appeal in the case of Mibanga 2005 EWCA Civ 367.

8. At [11] of the decision the Judge lists the documentary  evidence  before
her. At [14] of the decision the  Judge  declares  that  she  has  carefully
considered all of the evidence in the round in an overall assessment  before
reaching any findings of fact. The Judge directs herself correctly,  and  is
clearly aware of the need to take an holistic approach to  the  totality  of
evidence.

9. The problem is that in the first sentence of [23] the  Judge  finds  that
the appellant is not a credible witness and rejects his account. It  may  be
that the Judge intended that sentence  to  be  part  of  a  summary  of  the
discussion of evidence that follows, but at [36] and [41] the Judge's  words
create  (at  least)  the  impression  that  she  separately  considers   the
appellant's  account  and  reaches  a  conclusion  about   the   appellant's
credibility  before  considering  the  expert   country   report   and   the
psychiatric evidence produced.

10. Between [34] and [37] the Judge considers the country expert report.  At
[36], whilst considering the expert report, the Judge says

      Having rejected the appellant's account, I do not accept that he would
      be without family support if he were to relocate to a different area.

It appears that, in the midst of considering the country expert  report  and
before turning her attention to the medical evidence, the Judge has  already
rejected the appellant's account.

11. The Judge turns to the medical evidence between [30]  and  [42]  of  the
decision. In the first sentence of [41] the Judge says

      In considering the diagnosis, which I have  no  basis  upon  which  to
      dispute, I have to take into consideration my credibility findings.

The  Judge  clearly  says  that  she  considers  her  credibility   findings
separately to the diagnosis  of  PTSD.  The  Judge  clearly  says  that  her
separate credibility findings  are  used  to  consider  the  impact  of  the
diagnosis of mental illness.

12. The effect is that, despite taking correct guidance in  law,  the  Judge
appears to separate consideration of the various strands of evidence  rather
than taking an holistic approach before  reaching  conclusions.  It  is  the
Judge's own words which  indicate  that  the  Judge  makes  her  credibility
findings before considering the medical evidence. That is a  material  error
of law.

13. The Judge accepts the appellant's been diagnosed  with  PTSD.  I  cannot
see that any request was  made  for  changes  in  procedure  to  assist  the
appellant's evidence, however,  the  medical  evidence  indicates  that  the
diagnosis of anxiety  and  depression  with  complex  PTSD  may  affect  the
appellant's ability to provide flawless recall and  give  comprehensive  and
accurate evidence. The Judge  does  not  consider  whether  the  appellant's
mental illness caused some of the inconsistencies discussed in his  evidence
to occur. The Judge makes no reference to the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
Note.  At paragraph 30 of AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  1123  it
was said that failure to follow the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  No  2
of 2010

      ... Will most likely be a material error of law.

14. In AS (safety of Kabul) Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00118  the  Upper
Tribunal held that having regard to the security and humanitarian  situation
in Kabul as well as the difficulties faced by the  population  living  there
(primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other returnees, which  are  not
dissimilar  to  the  conditions  faced  throughout  may   other   parts   of
Afghanistan); it will not, in general be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  a
single adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if  he  does  not
have any specific connections or support network  in  Kabul.   However,  the
particular circumstances of an  individual  applicant  must  be  taken  into
account in the context of conditions in the place of  relocation,  including
a person's age, nature  and  quality  of  support  network/connections  with
Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental  health,  and  their  language,
education and vocational skills when  determining  whether  a  person  falls
within that general position.  A person with a support network  or  specific
connections in Kabul is likely to be in  a  more  advantageous  position  on
return, which may counter a particular vulnerability  of  an  individual  on
return.

15. The Judge accepted that the appellant  suffers  from  complex  PTSD.  At
[43] the Judge took guidance  from  AS  (safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
[2018] UKUT 00118, but did not set  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  this
appellant's case against the guidance given in the headnote  of  AS  (safety
of Kabul) Afghanistan CG. There is no analysis in the  Judge's  decision  of
the viability of relocation to Kabul for a young man  suffering  from  PTSD,
anxiety and depression, and who only speaks Pashtu.

16. The decision is tainted by material errors of law. I  set  the  decision
aside. None of the findings of fact can stand. I cannot  substitute  my  own
decision because a further fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

19. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Manchester  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Lloyd-Smith.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

21. I set aside the Judge's  decision  promulgated  on  17  June  2019.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed
              Date 29 January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle








