
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/12420/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                            |                                |
|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 March 2021                            |On 24 March 2021                |
|                                            |                                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     HNO

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Ms KA Smith, instructed  by  Barnes  Harrild  &  Dyer
Solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who  is  a  Iraqi  national  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  who
    emanates from within the IKR, and with date of birth given as  14.8.86,
    has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 3.3.20 (Judge Lewis), dismissing
    on all grounds his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, dated 12.9.19, to refuse his further submissions  dated  25.7.19
    in pursuit of a claim for international  protection  on  the  basis  of
    political opinion as a member of the Gorran Party.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 23.6.20. However, when the application was renewed  to
    the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission  on
    12.10.20, considering it  "arguable  that  a  witness  who  gave  clear
    evidence that the appellant was identified as someone who had  problems
    in Iraq and that no findings have been made on those  claims,"  (ground
    1). Judge Perkins also considered ground 2 arguable, stating "It may be
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  unlawfully  underrated  the
    content of significance of the Facebook posts."

 3. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The  Tribunal  has  also
    received a new appellant's bundle, submitted pursuant to Rule 15(2)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  However,  as  the
    initial hearing is confined to the issue of an error of law, I have not
    considered the additional material which was not before the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Included with the grounds of appeal (and copied  in  the  new
    bundle) is counsel's detailed typed  record  of  the  hearing  and  the
    evidence given. As Judge Perkins noted, the judge  also  made  a  typed
    record of proceedings.

 4. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Tan indicated that he did  not  oppose
    the appeal, given the evidence of the appellant's  witness,  Mr  S.  As
    recorded by counsel, in cross-examination this witness  confirmed  that
    he had returned to the  IKR  (Erbil)  and  confirmed  through  official
    channels both that the appellant was a member of the Gorran  Party  and
    that as a result he experienced the problems in Iraq that he  asserted.
    Whilst the judge records the evidence of Mr S, this important aspect of
    the witness' evidence was not recorded and, more significantly, it  was
    not addressed in the findings or taken into account in the  credibility
    assessment. At [33] of the decision, the judge stated only  that  Mr  S
    "confirmed that the appellant was a member of the Gorran  movement  and
    had been since 2016." At [46] of the decision, the  judge  accepted  Mr
    S's evidence that the appellant attended Gorran events and meetings  in
    the UK. At no point does the judge criticise or reject any part of  the
    evidence of Mr S. In the premises, I accept the submission of Ms  Smith
    and the concession of Mr Tan that important evidence relevant  to  both
    credibility and the  claimed  risk  on  return  to  the  IKR  has  been
    overlooked.

 5. Mr Tan further referred me to [8(d) to (g)] of the  grounds,  accepting
    that the evidence there referred to  had  not  been  addressed  by  the
    judge. This evidence  includes  adverse  comments  on  the  appellant's
    Facebook posts and that a person who had 'liked' one of those  comments
    was himself placed in difficulties, forcing him to relocate within  the
    IKR. The other evidence referred to was of armed persons coming to  the
    appellant's brother's home as a result of the appellant's  activity  in
    the UK. Also, there  was  evidence  that  on  return  to  the  IKR  the
    appellant would reasonably likely undergo a screening  process  at  the
    hands of Asayish, the Kurdish security services, creating a  real  risk
    that the appellant's sur place  activities  on  behalf  of  Gorran  and
    against the KDP would be revealed. Country  background  information  to
    which the judge's attention was drawn confirmed that Asayish  is  known
    to  commit  arbitrary  or  unlawful  abuse,  torture  and  killings  in
    detention centres. None of this evidence was addressed  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

 6. In the premises, I am satisfied that important evidence was  overlooked
    and/or not addressed adequately by the First-tier Tribunal and that  in
    consequence, this decision cannot stand but must be  set  aside  to  be
    remade. Both parties urged me to remit the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, as significant oral evidence will need to be taken, including
    from the appellant's witness.  Ms  Smith  also  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant now claims to be a Christian convert and the respondent  will
    be asked to consent to this new matter being raised.

 7. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiate all findings of fact and  the  conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal. In all the circumstances, I remit this appeal for
    a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis that this is a
    case which  falls  squarely  within  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement at paragraph 7.2.

 8. In the premises, and for the reasons set out  above,  I  find  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that it must
    be set aside to be remade de novo with no findings preserved.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester to  be
      remade de novo with no findings preserved.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 March 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 March 2021

