
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
                                                               PA/12067/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th August 2019                |On 11th September 2019             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     N A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Herself.
For the respondent: Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant was born in the United Arab Emirates and holds
       Jordanian nationality. She was born in June 1982. She is educated to
       degree level and worked as a photographer.

    2.  She married Mr AL in January 2016 in Jordan. Her family attended the
       wedding. He is originally from Palestine and is born in October 1966.
       He has acquired British nationality and works as a taxi driver. He
       was formerly married to SHK, an Algerian national. They have a son
       together, ZL, born in July 2004. His former wife lives locally.

    3. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 28 January 2018 using a
       business visit Visa, valid until 25 July 2018. On 29 May 2018 she
       made a claim for protection. A substantive interview took place on 18
       September 2018. The basis of the claim is that she now fears her own
       family. She claimed the appellant's former wife has turned them
       against her, making allegations about her moral character. These
       included claims that she engaged in pre-marital sex and took part in
       an explicit pornographic video with her husband posted online.

    4. The claim was refused on 2 October 2018. The respondent did not
       accept the claim was true. It was not accepted she had a genuine
       subjective fear. The respondent concluded the claim was fabricated so
       she could remain. Reliance was placed upon section 8 of the Asylum
       and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004 and her failure to
       claim on arrival. The claim made did not engage the Refugee
       Convention.

    5. In the alternative, if the claim were true the respondent took the
       view she could relocate within Jordan to avoid her family. It was
       open to her husband to join her.

The First tier Tribunal

    6. Her appeal had been heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge OM Williams at
       Manchester on 16 January 2018. The appellant was represented by
       Counsel. In a decision promulgated on 13 February 2019 the appeal was
       dismissed. By the time of the hearing it was said that her husband's
       son from his first marriage had recently joined the household.

    7. The judge did not find her underlying claim to be true. The judge did
       not consider it credible that her relatives would believe the things
       allegedly said about her by her husband's first wife. The judge
       pointed out that the appellant's family attended her wedding and she
       continued to be married before coming to the United Kingdom. The
       judge did not find it credible that her husband's former wife would
       go to the lengths of contacting family members and relatives in
       Jordan to cause difficulty.

    8. Reference is made inconsistencies between the appellant's screening
       and substantive interview and the fact that she made no reference to
       difficulties from her husband's first wife at screening.

    9.  Furthermore she had not provided a copy of the sexual video and
       photographs she said had been posted online. The judge felt that
       reliance could not be placed upon text messages she had provided.

   10. The judge pointed out that four months before the hearing her
       husband's former wife had allowed her son to go and live with his
       father and the appellant. The judge referred to Mahmood (S 85. NIAA
       2002 -`new matters') [2017] UKUT 00488 and concluded this was a new
       matter. In any event, had there been consent it would not have made
       any difference because his presence in the household would not
       prevent the appellant being returned to Jordan. This is because his
       biological father and mother remained in the United Kingdom and can
       take care of him.

The Upper Tribunal

   11. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
       judge erred in referring to the appellant's family attending her
       marriage as being relevant given that the allegations occurred after
       this. It was also considered unreasonable to expect production of
       sensitive materials such as the sexual video referred to. It was also
       considered arguable that the judge did not factor into the assessment
       the conservative culture of Jordan.

The previous listing

   12. This appeal had previously been listed on 31 May 2019. The appellant
       attended and indicated her previous representatives were no longer
       acting. There was a letter of file from her former representatives,
       Whitefield Solicitors Limited, dated 9 May 2019. They represented the
       appellant in the First-tier Tribunal. They advised that they were no
       longer acting for the appellant on the basis their fees not been
       paid. The appellant was advised by them to seek other legal advisers
       and that legal aid may be available. For the Upper Tribunal hearing
       she had not sought to obtain alternative representation. I asked
       about this and her husband said they could not afford to pay for
       lawyers. There was also no Arabic interpreter arranged. Consequently,
       the matter adjourned. My Directions stated the appellant was being
       given a further opportunity to organise representation should she so
       choose.

The relisted hearing

   13. The appellant attended and was accompanied by her husband. They
       indicated they had not sought representation. I was advised that
       since the last hearing the appellant was safely delivered of her baby
       and there were no complications. A middle eastern Arabic interpreter
       was available.

   14. I asked her husband for clarification about his son from his first
       marriage. He said he is an only child who joined their household in
       September 2018. I asked him how this came about if his first wife was
       antagonistic. He said it was so he could spy on them and relay
       information back. He said that he returned to his mother in March
       2019.

   15. Mr Bates continued to oppose the appeal, submitting there was no
       material error of law demonstrated. The judge had rejected the claim
       that the first wife of the appellant's husband had sent messages to
       Jordan and had given adequate reasons for this. The judge was
       entitled to rely upon the fact that his son came to live in the
       household as a contra indicator of the claim.

   16. The appellant said that her husband had been threatened by her family
       and that they want her to divorce him. He said that his former wife
       has been sending threatening text messages to her and this continued
       after the last hearing had adjourned. She said she continues to cause
       trouble for them and when she was pregnant she tried to kill her and
       the baby. I asked her for further details and she said she did not
       actually attempt to kill her but made threats. She said after she
       gave birth she was following her. She said that her husband had told
       the police of this but they did nothing.

Consideration

   17. In the refusal letter the respondent had rejected her claim that her
       husband's former wife was maligning her to her family. In support of
       the lack of credibility the respondent relied upon the fact she did
       not claim on arrival at Heathrow airport.

   18. First-tier Tribunal Judge O R Williams did not find she was being
       truthful. The judge sets out in detail, beginning at paragraph 26,
       examples of why her credibility was found wanting. These included the
       fact that his first wife permitted her child to go and live with the
       appellant and her husband. The judge also noted that there was no
       reference by her at screening to the core of her subsequent claim,
       namely, of her husband's former wife making accusations against her.

   19. These reasons were all sustainable. Given therefore that there had
       been outright rejection of the claim the conservative nature of
       Jordanian society or the question of honour killing does not arise.
       It is for the appellant to demonstrate some material error of law in
       the decision and she has failed to do so.

   20. The judge correctly noted that the presence of her husband's son in
       the household was a recent event, post-dating the decision.
       Consequently, this was a new matter. Even if considered the judge
       concluded it would not have affected the outcome of the appeal. As
       events have turned out this child has now returned to his mother.
       Similarly, the birth of the appellant's child is a new matter. I find
       no material error of law in the way the judge dealt with this issue.

   21. In conclusion, I find the judge correctly evaluated the evidence,
       made proper findings of fact and correctly applied the law.



Decision

No material error of law has been shown in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge OM Williams. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appeal shall stand.


Signed                                           Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.                 9 September 2019

