








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12614/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 4 March 2019                     |On: 14 March 2019                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                               Kariyawasam [W]

                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, counsel, instructed by MTC & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 24 November 1985. He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, promulgated on 31 December 2018, dismissing his appeal
      against  the  respondent's  decision  refusing  his  application   for
      international protection.

   2. She found that the appellant was detained  and  tortured  by  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities in 2009; that he was released after  payment  of  a
      bribe; that he  thereafter  left  Sri  Lanka  and  that  he  genuinely
      believed that the authorities remain interested in him.

   3. The appellant's own evidence was  that  he  does  not  and  never  has
      supported the LTTE and he has not undertaken any diaspora activity  in
      the UK. The Judge noted that the events which occurred were some  nine
      years ago. Although noting that  the  appellant  has  heard  that  the
      authorities have visited his parents' home  from  time  to  time,  she
      found that this has not  caused  them  to  have  to  move  house,  and
      otherwise there is no evidence that the appellant is  wanted  or  that
      there is an arrest warrant for him [32].

   4. She found at [35], that in assessing his risk on return to Sri  Lanka,
      the fact that his detention occurred in 2009 and not more recently  is
      significant in accordance with ME (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ
      1486.

   5. In granting the appellant permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Foudy stated that having  found  that  the  appellant  had  been
      detained in 2009, it is arguable that the Judge misapplied the country
      guidance authority in GJ and others (Post  Civil  War  Returnees)  Sri
      Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319. The other grounds also revealed errors  of
      law.

   6. On behalf of the appellant, Ms  Revill,  who  did  not  represent  the
      appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, adopted the grounds  seeking
      permission to appeal. She submitted that in  GJ,  the  Upper  Tribunal
      found that if  a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
      services, there remains a real risk of ill treatment or harm requiring
      international protection.

   7. In adopting the first ground, she noted that the Tribunal referred  to
      the decision in ME (Sri Lanka), supra. There the Court of  Appeal  was
      concerned with an appellant  who  had  been  detained  in  2014  which
      indicated that recent detention  is  compelling  evidence  of  ongoing
      risk. However, she submitted that it does not establish  the  converse
      proposition, namely, that earlier detention  will  not  give  rise  to
      ongoing risk. That constitutes an  erroneous  position  taken  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge.

   8. She submitted that the Tribunal in GJ at [146] and [13] of Appendix J,
      also considered evidence that those who had previously  been  released
      on payment of a bribe would be  recorded  as  escapees  and  absconder
      action would be commenced. The Judge however, did not consider whether
      the appellant would fall within risk category (d) of GJ as someone who
      would feature on an intelligence "stop" or "watch"  list  due  to  the
      nature of his escape from detention. The failure to consider this risk
      category is a material error.

   9. Nor did the Judge have regard to the  evidence  relating  to  the  in-
      country situation post dating GJ. Ms Revill referred  to  the  Freedom
      From Torture report dated 2017 in the appellant's  bundle  at  122-128
      which provided evidence of ongoing detention of those with imputed and
      low-level involvement with the LTTE after 2015. This runs contrary  to
      the Judge's finding at [36] that there has been a  significant  change
      in the focus of the Sri Lankan authorities.

  10. Ms Revill also contended that the Judge applied too high a standard of
      proof by placing undue weight on various factors in the assessment  of
      risk on return, including the lack of an arrest warrant.

  11. In GJ, the Tribunal heard evidence that  detention  in  Sri  Lanka  is
      routinely conducted in the absence of an arrest warrant [49]. Although
      the appellant did not suggest that he had been previously subjected to
      formal court proceedings,  given  the  nature  of  his  detention  and
      escape, the Judge wrongly placed weight on the absence  of  an  arrest
      warrant in the assessment of risk on return.

  12. In particular, she failed to give reasons why the passage of  time  is
      significant, which was necessary in the light of  the  finding  in  GJ
      that the authorities maintain a computerised intelligence led  'watch'
      list. There was no evidence to support the conclusion that the passage
      of time would  lead  to  the  removal  of  the  appellant  from  those
      computerised records. Accordingly,  a  higher  evidential  burden  was
      placed on the appellant.

  13. Ms Revill adopted ground 3 and submitted that the  psychiatric  report
      referred to an increased risk of suicide upon return. In the light  of
      her acceptance that the appellant had a  subjective  fear,  the  Judge
      should have considered the risk  of  harm  as  a  consequence  of  the
      deterioration of his mental health as a separate Article 3 claim.

  14. With regard to ground 4, she contended that the Judge did not properly
      consider relevant  factors  when  determining  the  impact  of  forced
      removal on the appellant's mental health including the availability of
      treatment and the willingness  of  the  appellant  to  engage  in  any
      available treatment in Sri Lanka.

  15. In concluding at [37] that the appellant would be able to  access  his
      current treatment in Sri Lanka as a default position,  the  Judge  did
      not have regard to the  'objective  evidence'.  In  GJ,  the  Tribunal
      expressly considered evidence indicating a lack of effective treatment
      for mental health conditions in Sri Lanka at [454]. There are only  25
      working psychiatrists in the whole of Sri Lanka. Money spent on mental
      health only really goes to the large  mental  health  institutions  in
      capital cities, which are inaccessible and do not provide  appropriate
      care for mentally ill people.

  16. Nor did the Judge consider how his fear of returning to Sri Lanka  may
      impact upon his ability to engage with treatment.

  17. Ms Cunha on behalf of the respondent  submitted  that  the  Judge  has
      considered the risk factors in GJ at [32] and [36]. The appellant  had
      not been supporting the LTTE. Nor  was  there  any  diaspora  activity
      which was significant having regard to her reference at  [34]  to  the
      Country Policy  and  Information  Note  relating  to  Sri  Lanka.  She
      submitted that the Judge has "done  enough".  She  has  considered  GJ
      appropriately.

  18. With regard to ME (Sri Lanka) supra, Ms Cunha accepted that whilst  it
      is correct that that decision was based  on  different  facts,  namely
      someone who was a member of the LTTE, the appellant has  never  worked
      for the LTTE but had  an  association  with  another  person  who  was
      involved with them. Nor was he ever detained since 2009.

  19. Ms Cunha noted that although accepting that the appellant  heard  that
      the authorities have visited his parents' home from time to time,  the
      Judge did not factor this in to her assessment regarding the  risk  on
      return. She submitted however that even though this may be  an  error,
      the issue is whether or not it is material.  She  submitted  that  the
      appellant would not fall into a relevant  category  having  regard  in
      particular to the respondent's CPIN  of  June  2017  relating  to  Sri
      Lanka.

  20. With regard  to  the  grounds  relating  to  Articles  3  and  8,  the
      psychiatric report did not state how the appellant would self harm  or
      how it relates to risk on return. The Judge was entitled  to  conclude
      that the psychiatrist had failed to take into  account  that  familial
      support would be available to the appellant.  Medical  facilities  are
      available in Sri Lanka, as noted by the respondent.

  21. With regard to the risk of suicide, 'the Judge can only  go  with  the
      evidence presented'. The  report  did  not  state  that  there  was  a
      likelihood of self harm. The appellant himself did not seek assistance
      until 2017 although he registered with a GP in 2015 [19-20].

  22. The Judge has engaged with the medical evidence as a whole  from  [16]
      onwards. Her conclusion that the evidence did not make  out  that  the
      appellant would take his own life having regard to  familial  ties  of
      support is sustainable. Nor was there a likelihood of very significant
      obstacles or  difficulties  on  return  which  would  hinder  his  re-
      integration.

  23. In reply Ms Revill referred to [7(d)] in GJ. It appears to be accepted
      that the appellant  was  sought  actively  by  the  authorities.  This
      suggests that there might well be an arrest warrant and in  particular
      that absconder action can be taken against him. If he is  detained  by
      the Sri Lankan security services, there remains a real  risk  of  ill-
      treatment or harm requiring international protection as noted  by  the
      Judge at [4].

  24. She referred to [17] in ME. The  real  question  is  whether  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities would have questions to ask the appellant. There is
      therefore a risk of questioning taking place.

  25. Finally, she again submitted that the Judge did  not  properly  assess
      the ability of the appellant to access his current  treatment  in  Sri
      Lanka. He might not even want to access it. He might not have a  sense
      of trust. The Judge has not engaged with that issue. None of this  was
      taken into account.







      Assessment

  26. In GJ, the Upper Tribunal held that if a person is detained by the Sri
      Lankan security services there remains a real risk of ill treatment or
      harm requiring international  protection.  That  guidance  remains  in
      force.

  27. The Judge sought to rely on the fact that  the  appellant's  detention
      occurred in 2009, and was not more recent. In seeking to rely  on  the
      decision  in  ME,  which  held  that  whilst  a  recent  detention  is
      compelling evidence of ongoing risk, I accept the proposition that  it
      does not follow that earlier detention may  not  be  relevant  to  the
      assessment of ongoing risk.

  28. In that respect, it was incumbent upon the Judge to  consider  whether
      the appellant, having previously been released on  the  payment  of  a
      bribe, would be recorded as an escapee or an  absconder  resulting  in
      absconder action being commenced against him  -  paragraph  [146]  and
      paragraph [13] of Appendix J, of GJ.

  29. Nor was there any consideration given  as  to  whether  the  appellant
      would appear on a "stop" or "watch" list  following  his  escape  from
      detention. There was evidence which post dated GJ produced by  Freedom
      From Torture dated 2017 regarding  ongoing  detention  of  those  with
      imputed and low level  involvement  with  the  LTTE  after  2015.  The
      question therefore was whether there has been a significant change  in
      the focus of the authorities as referred to by the Judge at [36].

  30. Moreover, she did not consider  that  there  remains  a  computerised,
      intelligence led watch list. There  was  no  evidence  that  the  mere
      passage of time would lead to the removal of a person in the  position
      of the appellant from these computerised records.

  31. The absence of an arrest warrant would not therefore in itself  reduce
      the risk of harm on return.

  32. I have also had regard to the submissions relating to the  appellant's
      mental health. In particular, the Judge did not consider,  whether  in
      the light of his subjective fear of returning to Sri Lanka,  he  would
      be able to engage with treatment on arrival. That was  highlighted  in
      the report of Dr  Abuaya  who  stated  that  the  appellant  in  these
      circumstances is unlikely to feel a  sense  of  safety  and  thus  his
      ability to trust any therapist or other healthcare professional  there
      would be compromised.

  33. Having regard to the  circumstances  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
      a point of law.

  34. I accordingly set aside the decision.

  35. The parties agreed that in that event the appeal should be remitted to
      the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.  The  parties
      agreed that the Judge's findings at [29] are to be preserved.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


           The Judge's findings at [29] of the decision are preserved.


      Anonymity direction not made.






            Signed                             Date 11 March 2019


                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

