
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12025/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2019                   |On 30 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL A MONSON


                                   Between

                                 AF (GUINEA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Alison Harvey (Counsel instructed by Migrant
Legal Action)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Keith sitting at Taylor House on 19 July 2018) dismissing her
    appeal against the decision made on 5 October 2017 to refuse her
    protection and human rights claims.

The Reasons for the grant of permission to appeal

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt granted permission to appeal for the
    following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal took an incorrect
         approach to the medical and country expert evidence and to the
         previous Tribunal decision."

Relevant background

 3. The Appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 March
    2004, and she is recorded as having claimed asylum the following day.
    She said that she had been born in Conarky, the capital of Guinea.  She
    had four siblings.

 4. She and her husband had both worked for the Humanitarian Assistance
    Network (HAN).  The organisation was accused by the Guinean authorities
    of an attempt to organise a coup to overthrow the incumbent President.
    The authorities started arresting people who worked for HAN.

 5. Her husband was arrested on 15 December 2003. The Appellant was
    arrested on 2 January 2004 and taken to PM3 Prison and later
    transferred to another prison, where she was tortured and raped by
    soldiers.  She escaped from prison on 20 March 2004 with the help an
    officer who agreed to let her escape after her having sex with him.

 6. She fled Guinea on 20 March 2004, travelling to Sierra Leone where she
    remained in hiding until 24 March 2004. From there she travelled on to
    the UK together with an agent.

 7. The Appellant's asylum claim was refused for the reasons set out in a
    letter from the Respondent dated 25 May 2004.  Her appeal came before
    Judge Cohen on 12 August 2004.  Both parties were legally represented.



 8. The judge received oral evidence from the Appellant, and in his
    subsequent Determination he gave his reasons for finding that her claim
    was not credible.  He found her claim to be internally discrepant,
    totally implausible and contrary to the objective evidence, and he held
    that the Appellant was totally lacking in credibility.

 9. At paragraph [33], Judge Cohen addressed the Appellant's claim that she
    had been raped and tortured whilst detained in Guinea.  Before him, the
    Appellant had said that she did not have any scarring because she did
    not allow the officers to beat her,

10. He found that if the Appellant had been raped and tortured as claimed,
    then she would have scarring or marks which could be assessed in a
    medical report.  He held that the Appellant's lack of scarring, and the
    lack of medical evidence in this regard, was further damaging to her
    credibility.

11. Permission to appeal against the decision of Judge Cohen was refused by
    His Honour Judge Ainley in a decision dated 25 January 2005.

12. With the assistance of her current legal representatives, the Appellant
    subsequently presented a fresh asylum claim based on a Medico Legal
    report by Dr Harvie of the Medical Foundation dated 6 December 2013 and
    a further report by her dated 16 September 2014.

13. As summarised in the subsequent Refusal decision of 5 October 2017, Dr
    Harvie found that there were 29 lesions on the Appellant's body.  Of
    these, there were six lesions on her legs which she opined were highly
    consistent with trauma from footwear, and 11 lesions which were typical
    of restraint of wrists and ankles.

14. In her report of 16 September 2014, Dr Harvie noted that the
    Appellant's explanation for not reporting scarring previously was that
    she had not looked at her body and so she was not aware of the extent
    of the marks on her body - and the marks which she had seen, she had
    not considered significant.

The Decision of Judge Keith

15. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Keith.  Mr Grewal, a
    solicitor, appeared on behalf of the Appellant.

16. In his subsequent decision, Judge Keith set out the Appellant's
    evidence at paragraphs [17] to [26]; the evidence of two supporting
    witnesses at paragraphs [27] to [30], and the respective closing
    submissions of the parties at paragraph [31] and [32].

17. At paragraph [36], the Judge set out in their entirety the guidelines
    from Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.

18. The Judge embarked on his findings of fact at paragraph [41].  He took
    the findings of Judge Cohen as his starting point.  He observed that
    the Appellant had denied to Judge Cohen that she had any scarring,
    whereas the medical evidence was that the Appellant had in fact
    extensive scarring.

19. At paragraph [45], Judge Keith noted that the lesions observed by Dr
    Harvie on a physical examination "using a well-lit room" included
    lesions "possibly caused by heavy boots hitting the front of calves
    whilst being raped" by soldiers.

20. At paragraph [48], the Judge said that, while the Medical Foundation's
    expertise were not in doubt, he had concerns about the lack of analysis
    of the scarring which was described as highly consistent with the
    Appellant's claimed version of events, "when one obvious alternative
    cause may have been the appellant's experience of previous rape within
    the home, which would explain why as a Muslim woman, her calves may
    have been bared."

21. At paragraphs [49] and [50], the Judge addressed the assessment of the
    psychological therapist, Ilana Bakal, who had been providing therapy
    services to the Appellant since 2010.  Whilst Ms Bakal described
    depression and PTSD in the context of beating and rape and detention,
    there was no analysis which distinguished between state ill-treatment
    and ill-treatment in the Appellant's first marriage.  While Ms Bakal
    described the Appellant's claimed version of events as having been
    consistent with the symptoms she saw, "the cause of that violence and
    assault was not analysed in further detail".

22. In summary, the Judge found that while Ms Bakal's assessment added a
    picture of someone receiving therapy over a significant period of time,
    her analysis of causation of PTSD was more limited than that of Dr
    Harvie's.

23. The Judge moved on at paragraph [51] to address the country expert of
    Professor Knorr.  He said it was noteworthy that Professor Knorr's
    assessment was based throughout on an assumption that the Appellant
    would return to Guinea alone.

24. The Judge acknowledged at paragraph [54] that Professor Knorr's
    analysis provided evidence that was not available to Judge Cohen on the
    general state of Guinea in 2004 and the fact that those assisting
    Sierra Leonean refugees were themselves targeted by the Guinean
    authorities.

25. However, he observed, Judge Cohen was particularly troubled by several
    aspects of the Appellant's specific evidence.  The Judge went on to
    discuss these aspects in paragraphs [55] to [57].

26. The Judge held at paragraph [58] that while Judge Cohen did not have
    the benefit of Professor Knorr's opinion of the general circumstances
    in Guinea, he was nevertheless able to form a view of the authenticity
    of the documents relied on and the likely provenance of a newspaper
    article which he believed to have been fabricated. This assessment was
    not, in Judge Keith's view, undermined by Professor Knorr's general
    opinion.

27. The Judge went on to reach the following conclusions:

         "60. I concluded, considering the fresh medical evidence in the
             context of Adjudicator Cohen's findings and the evidence
             available to him at the time that the appellant's claimed
             version of events remained not plausible. ...

         61.  Dr Harvie's report of scarring, in particular where there was
             a lack of explanation for why the Appellant's domestic
             violence at the hands of her first husband should be
             discounted as a cause of scarring, was one factor, but I also
             consider the implausibility and inconsistency in other aspects
             of the appellant's version of events.  The PTSD diagnosis,
             while it is not in doubt, was also similarly dependent in its
             analysis of causation on the appellant's version of events,
             mainly her assertion that she had suffered a fear of
             confinement prior to her UK imprisonment.

         62.  In summary, I find the appellant was not tortured, raped or
             detained or escaped from state detention, as claimed.  Her
             account of doing so has not previously been found to be
             plausible and whilst the medical evidence indicates PTSD and
             significant scarring, but also in the context of previous
             domestic violence from a former relationship, I did not find
             that the appellant was generally credible, considering
             paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules.  In particular I find
             that she has not been subjected to ill-treatment while in
             Guinea for the purposes of paragraph 339K.  She has not
             established a general credibility and material elements of her
             account were not plausible or consistent."



The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

28. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was made
    out, Ms Harvey developed the pleaded Grounds of Appeal.

29. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Clarke submitted that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had directed himself appropriately, and that no error of
    law was made out.

Discussion

30. Ground 1 is that the Judge erred in his treatment of the decision of
    Judge Cohen.  Ms Harvey submits that the Judge did not apply the
    Devaseelan guidelines correctly, and in particular failed to consider
    whether Judge Cohen might have reached a different decision on
    credibility had the evidence of scarring been before him.

31. In Devaseelan the Tribunal held inter alia as follows:

         "40. We now pass to matters that could have been before  the  first
             Adjudicator but were not.

             (4)  Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought  to
             the attention of the first  Adjudicator,  although  they  were
             relevant to the issues before him, should be  treated  by  the
             second  Adjudicator  with  the  greatest  circumspection.   An
             Appellant who  seeks,  in  a  later  appeal,  to  add  to  the
             available facts in an  effort  to  obtain  a  more  favourable
             outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the point  of
             view of credibility. ... It must also be borne  in  mind  that
             the first Adjudicator's  determination  was  made  at  a  time
             closer to the events alleged and in terms of both fact-finding
             and general credibility assessment  would  tend  to  have  the
             advantage. For this reason, the adduction of such facts should
             not usually lead to any  reconsideration  of  the  conclusions
             reached by the first Adjudicator."

32. I consider that the Judge's approach complied with the above guidance.
    The scarring on the Appellant's body was a fact personal to the
    Appellant.  It was a fact that could have been brought to the attention
    of Judge Cohen, but it was not.

33. Ms Harvey submits that the scars do not neatly fit within the above
    guideline as they exist independently of anything that the Appellant
    might say.  This is not correct for two reasons. Firstly, there is no
    incontrovertible evidence that the Appellant had scarring at the time
    of the hearing before Judge Cohen.  The only matter which is
    incontrovertible is that when Dr Harvie conducted a physical
    examination of the Appellant in 2014, she found extensive scarring as
    detailed on a body map attached to her report.  Secondly, while the
    scarring itself exists independently, the attribution of the scarring
    is dependent, at least in part, on what the Appellant says.

34. In Devaseelan at paragraph [42] the Tribunal added the gloss in
    guideline (7) that the force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4)
    and (6) is "greatly reduced if there is some very good reason why the
    Appellant's failure to adduce relevant evidence before the first
    Adjudicator should not be, as it were, held against him.  We think such
    reasons will be rare."

35. Ms Harvey submits that this gloss applies here, as there were cogent
    reasons for the Appellant not disclosing her scarring to Judge Cohen.
    These reasons were her distress and shame.

36. However, the implication that Judge Keith failed to take into account
    guideline (7) is not made out. Judge Keith acknowledged this
    explanation for the Appellant's previous suppression of the fact that
    she had scarring on her body. He referred to this explanation at
    paragraph [43] in the context of Dr Harvie's report, and at paragraph
    [49] in the context of the report from the psychological therapist, Ms
    Bakal. Judge Keith accepted that what Ms Bakal reported was consistent
    with the Appellant having previously been unwilling to describe the
    scarring to Judge Cohen because of a sense of shame and lack of
    awareness.

37. Accordingly, there is no merit in the submission that, as a result of
    taking the decision of Judge Cohen as his starting point, Judge Keith
    had a closed mind when it came to assessing the probative value of the
    medical evidence.  On the contrary, having regard to the structure of
    the judge's decision and his careful line of reasoning, it is
    abundantly clear that the Judge assessed the medical evidence on its
    own merits, and that his assessment was not contaminated by an a priori
    assumption that the Appellant was not a witness of truth.

38. Ground 2 is that the Judge failed to follow the correct approach to the
    medical evidence, and in particular that his approach fell foul of the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

39. The Judge did not make adverse credibility findings against the
    Appellant based on the findings of Judge Cohen before considering the
    implications of the medical evidence.  The Judge simply summarised the
    gist of Judge Cohen's findings, before turning to the medical evidence
    and the evidence of the country expert.  The Judge then returned to the
    findings of Judge Cohen before reaching his overall conclusion on the
    credibility of the core claim of past persecution.

40. Ground 3 is that the Judge erred in law in substituting his own
    irrational evaluation of the clinical evidence in substitution for the
    clinical findings of the medical experts.

41. Dealing first with the scarring report of Dr Harvie, the Judge set out
    verbatim Dr Harvie's findings on the lesions observed on the front of
    the Appellant's calves which the Appellant attributed to heavy footwear
    scraping against her legs whilst being raped by soldiers in detention.

42. As highlighted by the Judge at paragraph [45], Dr Harvie's finding was
    twofold.  Firstly, she found that there were "multiple other ways" that
    the traumas observed by her could have been caused to the front of the
    Appellant's calves.  Secondly, she found that there was however,
    "nothing in what is known about her lifestyle or other explanations
    that would suggest another cause." Dr Harvie went on to say that the
    Appellant would not have had her legs exposed, as she was an Islamic
    woman and she reported that she covered her legs.  This made it
    unlikely that trauma from other causes could occur.

43. As noted by the Judge at paragraph [46] of his decision, Dr Harvie had
    recorded in her report at paragraph 2 that the Appellant had suffered
    domestic violence in her previous marriage, including rape and physical
    violence, albeit that the violence the Appellant described was
    slapping, and not punching, kicking or beating.

44. Since Dr Harvie's primary finding was that there were multiple other
    ways the traumas to the front of the calves could have been caused, it
    was clearly open to the Judge to question why Dr Harvie had nonetheless
    ruled out all the other multiple ways of the lesions being caused other
    than the specific attribution given by the Appellant.

45. This was particularly so when the reasoning of Dr Harvie with regard to
    the exclusion of other causes was not based on her medical expertise
    (which led to find that the lesions were non-specific and could have
    been caused by multiple other ways), but on the non-medical assumption
    that the Appellant would never have found herself in a situation where
    an alternative cause could have arisen, because her legs would have
    always been covered.

46. Since elsewhere in her report Dr Harvie had acknowledged the Appellant
    had been the victim of domestic violence and rape at the hands of her
    first husband, it was open to the Judge to question this non-medical
    assumption on the ground that within Dr Harvie's report there was an
    obvious alternative scenario in which the Appellant might have had her
    calves bared, and might have sustained lesions as a result of being
    raped by her first husband.

47. The Judge did not thereby substitute his own clinical finding that the
    lesions observed by Dr Harvie were attributable to heavy footwear
    scraping against the Appellant's legs when she was being raped by her
    first husband.  The Judge was simply pointing out, as it was open to
    him to do, that Dr Harvie had implicitly discounted domestic violence
    as a possible explanation for the lesions on the calves, without
    explicit analysis or reasoning.

48. At paragraph [48], the Judge addressed the claimed link between the
    Appellant's PTSD and her claimed ill-treatment in detention.  According
    to Dr Harvie, the link was a fear of confinement and of people in
    uniforms.  Dr Harvie recognised that the Appellant had been imprisoned
    in the United Kingdom, but indicated that these fears predated her
    imprisonment.  The Judge continued:

         "However, Dr Harvie's assessment was of course many years after
         imprisonment in the United Kingdom and in reaching that conclusion,
         Dr Harvie was entirely reliant on the Appellant's assertion that
         her dreams and fear of confinement had predated her UK
         imprisonment.  Whilst I did not discount her conclusion as a
         result, the conclusion in turn depended very much on the
         Appellant's credibility and whether she was likely to seek to
         mislead Dr Harvie."

49. Ms Harvey submits that the Judge erred in law in not accepting Dr
    Harvie's expert evidence that the Appellant's PTSD flows from her
    treatment in detention in Guinea, rather than from her experience of
    detention in the United Kingdom.

50. Ms Harvey's submission runs counter to the guidance given by the Court
    of Appeal in JL (Medical reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145
    (IAC) on the differing roles of the judicial decision-maker and the
    expert.  At paragraph 3 of the head note, the following is stated:

         "The authors of such medical reports also need to understand that
         what is expected of them is a critical and objective analysis of
         the injuries and/or symptoms displayed. They need to be vigilant
         that ultimately whether an Appellant's account of the underlying
         events is or is not credible and plausible is a question of legal
         appraisal and a matter for the Tribunal Judge, not the expert
         doctors."

51. The issue of the true cause of the Appellant's PTSD was a matter of
    legal appraisal for the Judge. He was not bound to accept Dr Harvie's
    opinion as to the cause.

52. Ground 4 is that the Judge failed to understand the expert evidence of
    Ms Bakal, and thus proceeded on an erroneous factual basis.  Ms Harvey
    submits that the Judge failed to understand that as a representative of
    Freedom from Torture, Ms Bakal's remit was to deal with intentional
    infliction of suffering inflicted for a purpose by a person acting in
    an official capacity.  So when Ms Bakal states that the Appellant has
    the characteristic features of a survivor of torture, it is to this
    that she is referring, not to the Appellant having suffered spousal
    violence.

53. I do not consider that the Judge misunderstood Ms Bakal's remit.  What
    he was doing in paragraphs [49] and [50] was making an assessment of
    the probative value of Ms Bakal's report.  It was open to the judge to
    find that the report was limited in its probative value for the reasons
    which he identified.

54. Ground 5 is that it was procedurally unfair for the Judge to find that
    the Appellant's scars or her PTSD might be the result of her treatment
    within her first marriage without giving the Appellant the opportunity
    to refute this by evidence, or giving her representative the
    opportunity to refute the point by argument.

55. I do not consider that there was any procedural unfairness. The
    Appellant's evidence was clear.  She attributed the scars and her PTSD
    to her claimed detention in 2004, and the two experts opined that the
    scarring and the PTSD symptoms were strongly supportive of this
    account. In postulating alternative causes for the scarring and the
    symptoms of PTSD, the Judge was not straying outside the evidence that
    was known to the two experts.

56. Ground 6 is that the Judge made findings about the Appellant's ability
    to obtain medical care and social support in Guinea that were contrary
    to the uncontested evidence, and Ground 7 is that the Judge was
    irrational in accepting that the Appellant was a suicide risk while at
    the same time holding that she did not have a genuine fear of
    persecution in Guinea.

57. On the topic of the impact on the Appellant's mental health on her
    return to Guinea, the Judge held at paragraph [64] that the expert
    assessment of the likely impact was within the context of her returning
    as a lone woman.  However, the Appellant had witnesses who were willing
    to attend the Tribunal and who had relatives in Conarky.  He did not
    accept that they would be unwilling to assist or accommodate the
    Appellant, even if she either chose to or was not able to be reconciled
    with her family in Guinea.  In summary, he did not find that she was at
    risk of returning as a lone woman and he found that she would be able
    to access accommodation and close support.

58. The Judge addressed the country expert report of Professor Knorr at
    paragraph [65].  Professor Knorr was clear that, as a result of regime
    change, the Appellant would not be of any objective risk on return.

59. The judge held that the appellant also did not have a genuine
    subjective fear that State actors would mistreat her, "noting that her
    previous ill-treatment had not occurred".

60. While the Appellant suffered from PTSD and was assessed as being a
    suicide risk, the lack of a genuine fear of persecution led him to
    conclude that there was not a risk that her rights under Articles 3 or
    8 would be breached, particularly as she would be returning to Guinea
    with an appropriate network of support.

61. He found that Professor Knorr's assessment of the availability of
    medical treatment was slightly inconsistent, suggesting that on the one
    hand such treatment was not available, but on the other hand, even if
    it was available, she would not be able to access it.  The Judge
    continued:

         "In reality, the appellant had been receiving ongoing therapy
         sessions over a number of years from the Medical Foundation, and I
         conclude, that with appropriate support of her close friends and
         social network in Guinea, the therapy services and an equivalent
         nature could be accessed by the Appellant in Guinea.  In addition,
         I find that the appellant would be able to access the services
         available there.  In reaching that assessment I considered
         Professor Knorr's assertions about the limited availability of such
         services but also the medical COI assessment referred to at
         paragraph (171) of the Refusal letter which referred to follow up
         by psychologists from public facilities in Conarky."

62. As with the medical evidence, Ms Harvey advances a litany of criticisms
    in respect of the Judge's findings on the Appellant's ability to access
    appropriate mental health care and social support in Guinea.

63. I consider that these criticisms are no more than the expression of
    disagreement with findings that were reasonably open to the Judge for
    the reasons which he gave.  In particular, it was open to the Judge to
    find that relatives of her UK-based friends would support the Appellant
    in Guinea.

64. Having reviewed Professor Knorr's report, I am entirely satisfied that
    the Judge's findings on the availability and accessibility of medical
    treatment and care are sustainable, and are not irrational as implied
    by the error of law challenge.

65. Professor Knorr herself expressly linked the issue of accessibility to
    an asserted non-availability of social or kinship support.  This is
    exemplified in paragraph 5 of her report where she said as follows:

         "On the background of the information provided concerning the lack
         of medication and treatment in Guinea and [MF's] condition of
         mental health and the lack of kin support she would face I conclude
         that [MF] would not be in a position to gain access to any sort of
         adequate mental health care.  She would be in a particularly weak
         position to get access to medication and therapy as she has no one
         who would assist her in obtaining treatment ..."

66. Professor Knorr highlighted the fact that Guinea had the lowest ratio
    of psychiatrists per people in West Africa.  But the Appellant was not
    receiving treatment from a psychiatrist in the UK.

67. The Judge's approach to the assessment of whether there was a real risk
    of a violation of Article 3 ECHR on the grounds of suicide risk was
    entirely in line with the guidance given in the authorities which he
    cited.  It was not irrational of the Judge to take into account that
    there was neither a well-founded nor a genuine subjective fear of
    persecution. On the contrary, a failure to do so by the Judge would
    have been erroneous in law.

68. At paragraph [69], the Judge held that the Appellant continued to
    maintain contacts in connections in Guinea.  She was not financially
    independent in the United Kingdom and had relied over many years from
    assistance from friends as well as receiving significant treatment by
    the NHS for cancer, with financial consequences to the UK taxpayer.
    The personal life which she had developed in the United Kingdom was
    when she had no expectation remaining permanently in the United
    Kingdom.

69. The Judge continued:

         "Based on the findings of what he reached, I concluded that there
         were not significant obstacles to her return to Guinea and that her
         return there was proportionate."

70. In Ground 8, Ms Harvey submits that the Judge erred in law in his
    assessment of the Appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR in two
    respects.  Firstly, she says that the findings of the Judge were not
    adequately reasoned.  Secondly, she submits that taking into account
    the Appellant's past disability as a sufferer from ovarian cancer
    constitutes unlawful discrimination against the Appellant contrary to
    Section 13 of the Equality Act 2010.

71. The inadequacy of reasoning challenge is based on the proposition that
    the Judge only devoted two short paragraphs to the Article 8 claim.
    However, as the Judge made clear, his finding on Article 8 was shaped
    by his earlier detailed findings on the protection claim and the
    Article 3 (mental health/suicide risk) claim.

72. On the issue of proportionality, it was not unlawful of the Judge to
    take into account that the Appellant's unlawful presence in the UK
    following the exhaustion of her appeal rights in respect of her initial
    asylum claim had had an adverse impact on the UK taxpayer.

Notice of Decision

73. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law, and accordingly the decision stands.  This  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 14 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
