
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12358/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 June 2017                       |On 06 February 2020                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                    O N G
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Sane  (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have made an anonymity order.  Such an order was made by the  First-
tier Tribunal and, since nothing was said about that at the hearing  before
me, I have concluded that the status quo ought to be preserved.  There  may
be some risk, if the appellant has  given  a  truthful  or  partly  truthful
account of events, that any publicity about him which somehow  reaches  Iran
might create risk or enhance already existing risk to him  or,  conceivably,
to his family who remain in that country.

2.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  from  a  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Watson  hereinafter  "the Judge")  whereupon
she dismissed the appeal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  of
24 August 2016 refusing to grant international protection.

3.    By way of brief background, the appellant is a national  of  Iran  and
was born on 13 March 1984.  He came to  the  UK  on  28 July 2014  as  a
Tier 4 Student Migrant under what is usually referred to  as  the  "Points
Based System".  He claims to have converted to Christianity since coming  to
the UK.  He asserts that as a consequence of his conversion  becoming  known
his family home in Iran was raided by the authorities.  He claimed  that  if
he were to return to Iran he would be treated as an apostate  and  would  be
persecuted.

4.    The Secretary of State, having interviewed the  appellant  and  having
considered his account, disbelieved it.  It was not  accepted  that  he  had
genuinely converted to Christianity and it was not accepted that  there  had
been any raid upon his family home in Iran.  Nor  was  it  thought  that  he
would face risk simply on the basis that he would be returning as  a  failed
asylum claimant.  In that context it was noted that it appeared he had  left
Iran legally.

5.    The appeal was considered at a hearing  of  13 December 2016.   Both
parties were represented and the appellant gave oral  evidence.   The Judge
went on to produce written reasons for her decision to  dismiss  the  appeal
and those are dated 23 December 2016.  Those reasons are, most  helpfully,
clearly expressed and easy to read.

6.    At  paragraph 16  of  the  written  reasons  the Judge  recorded  an
agreement between the parties to the effect that the outcome of  the  appeal
would turn on credibility.  As to that, she said this:

    "The issues

    16.    It was agreed that the issues relate entirely to the appellant's
    credibility.  If  I  find  that  his  core  account  of  conversion  to
    Christianity is proved to the required standard of  proof,  his  asylum
    appeal will succeed.   The  country  guidance  and  objective  evidence
    support this."

7.    The Judge then went on to explain why she did not, in  fact,  believe
the appellant's account.  She said this:

    "Documentary and Oral Evidence - Analysis

    17.    The appellant had claimed that his application  for  asylum  was
    prompted after his family home was raided  in  Iran.   His  mother  had
    telephoned to tell him about it.  I found his account  of  this  to  be
    improbable.  He said that the reason why no one from his home had  sent
    any evidence about the claimed raid was because it was unsafe for  them
    to do so.  He elaborated and claimed that his mother would contact  him
    through whats app, skype and telephone but that she would not  be  able
    to use email to send a statement.   In  further  cross examination  he
    confirmed that his brother and sister and father lived in the home  and
    they had all been present at the raid.  His sister and father lived  in
    the home and they had all been present at the raid.  His brother was  a
    student.   When asked whether his brother was unable to use  the  email
    or Internet to produce evidence about the raid  the  appellant  claimed
    that his brother, a student, did not have the knowledge  to  email.   I
    found this not credible.  He had described his mother using other means
    of modern communication and his explanation of the  family's  inability
    to use the computer was not credible.  The appellant clearly was  aware
    that face book was subject to a filter  in  Iran  and  described  other
    means of communication as preferable.  I find that his claim  that  his
    family home was raided to be false and put forward to bolster an asylum
    claim that was made shortly before his visa was to expire.

    18.    I further found his evidence about his church activities  to  be
    inconsistent.  He had described a different programme of church  events
    in his interview to his oral evidence.  I accept that he  has  attended
    prayer and church meetings but not to the extent claimed.

    19.    The Pastor [N] is the pastor of a church group  which  uses  his
    own home address for correspondence and meets at a community centre  as
    it does not have its own premises.  It has no particular processes  for
    assessing whether a person is genuine  in  beliefs.   He  attended  the
    Tribunal and has made a statement which is in  the  bundle.   I  accept
    that the Pastor is genuine in his own belief and wishes to  believe  in
    the appellant's conversion.  However his evidence  was  not  consistent
    with that of the appellant.  The appellant when asked  about  the  last
    prayer meeting attended stated  that  it  was  3 weeks  prior  to  the
    hearing.  When the pastor was asked the same question as  to  the  last
    prayer meeting that the appellant had attended he stated  that  it  was
    last week  and  when  pressed  on  the  point  confirmed  that  he  had
    personally been told that by a Reverend [H] who had taken the meeting.
    I take from this that the Pastor wished  to  assist  the  appellant  by
    saying whatever he thought would help him in his  application  and  his
    general good will and wish to believe in  the  appellant's  claims  has
    misled him and I can give his evidence little weight.  Further he could
    give no evidence as to how checks  were  carried  out  to  ensure  that
    someone is a genuine convert prior to a baptism.

    20.    I have noted that a number of people from  the  church  attended
    and I find that they have embraced the appellant and  have  a  wish  to
    assist him.  They were asked no questions on attending the Tribunal and
    I find they are entirely genuine in their  belief  in  the  appellant's
    conversion."

8.    Then, and by way of an alternative finding, the Judge said this:

    "22.   If I am wrong in my findings of fact that he is  not  a  genuine
    convert, I find in any event that the authorities are  unaware  of  the
    appellant's religious interest and would not be interested  in  him  on
    his return.  I do not accept that he has a faith that would require him
    to convert or preach and by necessity come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities.  As such he is not  at  risk  of  persecution  or  serious
    harm."

9.    An application to  the  Upper Tribunal  followed.   The  grounds  are
lengthy but, in a nutshell, it was contended that the Judge  had  erred  in
failing to adequately reason her adverse credibility  finding  and  had  not
had proper regard to applicable case law  and  relevant  background  country
material with respect  to  the  alternative  finding.   The Judge  granting
permission said this:

    "2.    The grounds assert that the judge's decision is fatally  flawed
    by a failure to give adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  credibility,
    flawed reasoning and a failure properly and adequately to consider  the
    evidence before the tribunal.

    3.     The grounds disclose arguable errors of law capable of affecting
    the outcome."

10.    Permission  having  been  granted,  the  matter   came   before   the
Upper Tribunal (before me) for a consideration as to whether the Judge had
erred in law and, if so, what should  flow  from  that.   Representation  at
that  hearing  was  as  indicated  above  and  I   am   grateful   to   each
representative.

11.   Both representatives took the view that the decision of the Judge was
flawed with respect to the alternative finding because  it  appeared  to  be
inconsistent with the apparent acceptance  by  the  judge  that  the  appeal
turned  on  credibility.  However,  Ms Aboni  argued  that   the   adverse
credibility finding itself was sound such that whatever  might  be  said  of
the alternative finding did not matter. She said that  the Judge  had  made
findings open to her and had given  adequate  reasons  for  those  findings.
She stressed that the Secretary of State's "reasons for refusal letter"  had
contained an extensive list of reasons for rejecting the claimed  raid  upon
the family home.  Ms Sane contended that  the Judge  had  disbelieved  the
whole of the account simply because the  raid  had  been  disbelieved.  That
represented an incomplete assessment. Further, she had not engaged with  the
consistent evidence of the appellant and a witness from whom  she  heard  (a
Pastor I shall simply refer to as N) regarding the nature and the detail of
the claimed conversion.

12.   It is right to say that a judge does not have to  refer  to  each  and
every aspect of the evidence when explaining a decision.  It is  also  right
that the reasons given for a decision only have to be  adequate.   I  remind
myself that grounds which do  not  go  beyond  mere  disagreement  with  the
findings and conclusions do no demonstrate error of law.

13.   Despite the above, I have concluded that the Judge  did  err  in  law
with respect to her adverse credibility assessment.  In  that  context,  she
did have quite extensive  written  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  from
N regarding the claimed conversion.   That,  of  course,  would  have  been
supplemented by oral evidence.   Whilst  it  is  perhaps  marginal,  I  have
concluded that what she had to say does not show  that  she  had  adequately
engaged with the thrust and detail of that  evidence.   Further  and  in  my
judgment more importantly, it does appear from what the Judge had to say at
paragraph 19 of her written reasons to the effect (on my reading) that  she
thought N had, effectively, decided not to tell her the  truth  because  of
his wish to assist the appellant has been properly reasoned.  The Judge put
it in a kindly manner but the words  "I  take  from  this  that  the  Pastor
wished to assist the appellant by saying whatever he thought would help  him
in his application" do seem to indicate that she had taken the view  he  was
lying to her.  That was a conclusion of significance which, in my  judgment,
required a somewhat more detailed explanation than was given. I  would  also
conclude that the inconsistency the Judge had identified at paragraph 18 of
her written reasons was inadequately explained.

14.   I take Ms Aboni's point that there were  other  credibility  concerns
raised in the reasons for refusal letter.   However,  I  can  only  base  my
reasoning upon the Judge's own concerns with respect to credibility  rather
than those expressed at an earlier stage  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
State.

15.   It might well be the case that the Judge would not have had  to  have
done very much more than she did to make her explanation as  to  credibility
sufficiently robust to withstand a "reasons challenge" which  is  what  this
is.  However, in light of the above I have concluded that  she  did  err  in
law.

16.   The Judge's decision is not saved by her alternative finding because,
whilst she was not bound by any agreement between the  representatives  that
the appeal turned  on  credibility,  it  appeared  from  what  she  said  at
paragraph 16 that she accepted that that was  the  case  too  and,  in  any
event, given the party's view that it did,  it  would  have  been  incumbent
upon her to have explained why she was differing from that  if  she  was  to
dismiss the appeal on alternative grounds.

17.   When I informed the representatives that I had decided  to  set  aside
the Judge's decision,  both  indicated  that  they  preferred  remittal  as
opposed to my remaking the decision myself.  In any event, Ms Sane was  not
in a position to  proceed  by  way  of  what  would  have  been  a  complete
rehearing before me, given that N had not been  warned  that  his  evidence
might be required.  That, perhaps, represents  something  of  a  failing  on
behalf of those advising the appellant and instructing Ms Sane  given  that
directions did make it clear that remaking might  take  place  at  the  same
hearing.  Nevertheless, I am required to do what is fair  and,  in  all  the
circumstances, I have concluded that fairness dictates  I  should  remit  to
the First-tier Tribunal as an expert fact-finding body given  that  matters
will have to be heard entirely afresh.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  That decision is set aside.

The appeal is remitted for a complete rehearing.


Signed:     Date: 15 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway



Anonymity

I grant the  appellant  anonymity  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  No  report  of  this  case  shall
identify him or any member of his family. Any breach may result in  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed:     Date: 15 June 2017

Upper Tribunal M R Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award


Signed:     Date: 15 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway



Directions for the remaking of the Decision.

1.    This appeal is remitted to the  First-tier Tribunal  for  a  complete
rehearing.  Nothing shall be preserved from the  previous  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal.

2.    The appeal shall be heard by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal other
than First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson.

3.    Since  the  paperwork  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  file  appears  to  be
incomplete, the appellant's representatives  must  send  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal a comprehensive bundle of all documents  it  wishes  to  rely  upon
even if that documentation has previously been filed.

4.    These directions may be supplemented by further directions made  by  a
judge of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:     Date: 15 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway

