
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/12369/2018
                                                PA/12367/2018, PA/12381/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 May 2019                        |On 20 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                           [R U] (first Appellant)
                          [T U] (second Appellant)
                           [K M] (third Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Jackson &
Canter
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellants, nationals of Rwanda, have permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Fowell of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  sent  on  20
    March 2019 dismissing their appeals against the decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 11 October 2018 to refuse their protection  claim.  Since
    the appeals of the second and third appellants, who are children of the
    first appellant, are dependent on the first appellant's claim, I  shall
    refer below to "the appellant" until the final paragraph.

2.   The appellant's grounds contend that the judge  erred  in:  failing  to
    give due weight to the contents of the expert's report (grounds  1  and
    2); misconstruing the evidence (ground 3); failing to consider material
    evidence (ground 4); attaching weight to irrelevant matters (ground 5);
    failing to give fair notice to issues deemed relevant to  the  decision
    (ground 6); and failing to apply the correct standard of proof.

3.   After discussion with both representatives, Ms Everett  accepting  that
    there were significant shortcomings in the judge's decision,  I  stated
    that I would be setting aside the decision of the  judge  for  material
    error of law in a written decision to follow shortly.

4.   Without seeking to go through the grounds sequentially, I am  persuaded
    that the judge's decision contains several errors.  The judge was wrong
    at paragraph 50 to state that the appellant  made  no  mention  in  her
    witness statement of being taken down to a river  and  threatened  with
    drowning (the witness statement did refer to this); wrong in  paragraph
    57 to count against the appellant that she could have obtained evidence
    from her mother (the appellant's  evidence  was  that  her  mother  was
    deceased and the judge did not state that this claim was rejected); and
    wrong to state at paragraph 47 that there was no  evidence  to  suggest
    that  those  who  had  merely  signed  the  petition   supporting   the
    candidature of Diane Rwigara were being  rounded  up  as  a  matter  of
    course (paragraph 61 of the expert report states that "[m]any of  those
    who signed the petition were pursued too.  However, because  they  were
    only low-level activists, there is very little reported  about  them").
    Although not a point directly raised  in  the  grounds,  I  would  also
    observe that in counting against the appellant her two and a half month
    delay in claiming asylum, the judge does not appear  to  have  properly
    engaged with her explanation for the delay.  Further,  it  is  doubtful
    that the judge was entitled to extract from  the  appellant's  evidence
    that she had learnt about her husband's  arrest  in  mid-February  (see
    paragraph 61); that is not what  she  said  in  terms  about  when  she
    learnt.

5.    Taken  cumulatively  the  three  aforementioned  errors  amount  to  a
    material error of law.  I see  no  alternative  to  setting  aside  the
    decision of the judge and remitting it to the FtT to  be  heard  afresh
    (not before Judge Fowell).  Whilst the appellants may  face  an  uphill
    task in refuting  the  respondent's  identification  of  a  significant
    number of shortcomings in her account, they are entitled to a  de  novo
    hearing to put her case.

6.   To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error  of  law;



    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Fowell).

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 16 April 2019
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
