
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12121/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     M Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sills, instructed by Howe & Co. solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision which I promulgated on 30 May  2019,  I  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to  be
    set aside. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born in  1994  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
         Turkey. Travelling via Greece, he arrived in the United Kingdom  in
         January 2018. By a decision dated 11 October 2018, the Secretary of
         State refused his  application  for  international  protection.  He
         appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,   in   a   decision
         promulgated on 8 January 2019, dismissed his appeal. The  appellant
         now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   I find that the judge has erred in law such that her  decision
         falls to be set aside. However, I find that many of the findings of
         fact reached by the judge should stand. In my  view,  Ground  2  is
         made out. This ground records that at [26] the judge accepted  that
         the appellant had attended a Gulen school at primary and  secondary
         level. The judge wrote that, 'the appellant certainly  demonstrated
         during his interview quite a  lot  of  knowledge  about  the  Gulen
         movement and this is understandable because the appellant  said  he
         attended primary and secondary school run by the Gulen movement but
         I find that he has provided no credible evidence that satisfies  me
         that he was an active member of the Gulen movement, then  he  is  a
         political profile in Turkey which would have  brought  him  to  the
         attention of the Turkish authorities.' [my emphasis].  Mr  Diwnycz,
         who appeared for the Secretary of State before the Upper  Tribunal,
         acknowledged  that  the  judge  had  not  considered  whether   the
         appellant faced a real risk on return to Turkey on account of  such
         involvement with the Gulen movement which the  judge  accepted  had
         occurred. What is not entirely clear from the decision  is  whether
         or not the judge  accepted  that  the  appellant,  in  addition  to
         attending a  Gulen  school  or  schools,  had  subsequently  become
         further involved working for the Gulen movement. Given  that  there
         is no clear finding either way, that aspect of the claim may be re-
         examined at the resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

         3.   The remaining grounds have little, if  any,  merit.  Ground  1
         complains that that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal is
         invalid because it has  not  been  dated  or  signed.  Wisely,  Mrs
         Choudhry, who appeared for the appellant before the Upper Tribunal,
         did not pursue this ground. The First-tier Tribunal has produced  a
         decision in writing as is required to do. The decision has not been
         invalidated in any way, as the ground suggests. Ground 3 deals with
         the judge's finding regarding an application ('Bylock') relating to
         Gulen political activity which the appellant claims he had  on  his
         mobile phone and which he asserts  the  Turkish  authorities  would
         become aware of my making a 'search  of  the  Internet.'  I  wholly
         agree with the judge who found at  [29]  that  'the  appellant  has
         provided no  evidence  that  the  authorities  and  access  to  his
         personal phone to ascertain that he had the Bylock  application  on
         his phone.' The appellant has failed to  discharge  the  burden  of
         proving  that,  without  access  to  his  mobile   telephone,   the
         authorities would be able to discover that the appellant was  using
         the  application  simply  by  searching  the  Internet.   Ground  5
         complains that the judge at [37] wrongly assumed that, because  the
         appellant had been sent to a Gulen  movement  school,  his  parents
         must inevitably have supported the movement.  The  resumed  hearing
         before  the  Upper  Tribunal  will  be  concerned  only  with   (i)
         determining whether as a fact the appellant worked  for  the  Gulen
         movement following his schooling and (ii) whether  his  involvement
         through schooling or otherwise with the movement would expose  into
         a real risk on return to Turkey. The judge's findings regarding the
         parents are not relevant to the determination of that issue. In any
         event, I find that the finding was available to the judge  and  did
         not, in the context of all the evidence, amount to  speculation  on
         her part. Ground 6 also has no merit. This ground asserts that  the
         judge erred in law by concluding that the appellant  had  lied  the
         United Kingdom authorities because  he  did  not  claim  asylum  in
         Greece. The judge did not err by concluding  that  the  appellant's
         credibility was damaged by his failure to claim asylum  in  Greece,
         through which he travelled en route to the United Kingdom and which
         was a country which would have provided him with the means to claim
         international protection. That finding and the damage it  has  upon
         the appellant's credibility as a witness shall stand.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  8  January
         2019 is set aside. All  the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.  The
         following issues will be considered at a  resumed  hearing  by  the
         Upper  Tribunal  (2  hours;  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane;  Turkish
         interpreter) : (i) did the appellant work for  the  Gulen  movement
         following  the  conclusion  of  his  schooling  and;  (ii)  is   it
         reasonably  likely  that  the   appellant's   involvement   through
         schooling or otherwise with the Gulen movement will expose him to a
         real risk of persecution or Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment on  return
         to Turkey. Both parties  may  rely  upon  fresh  evidence  provided
         copies of any documentary evidence (including  witness  statements)
         are sent to the Upper Tribunal and the other party the less than 10
         days prior to the resumed hearing."

 2. I shall continue to refer to the appellant as a supporter of the  Gulen
    Movement rather than by any other designation. The Turkish  authorities
    hold the U.S.-based cleric, Fethullah Gulen, responsible for the failed
    coup of July 2016. Both parties accept  that  the  Turkish  authorities
    seek to question and detain those whom they consider may  be  followers
    of the Gulen Movement and that the  prison  conditions  in  which  such
    detainees may be held are likely to infringe Article 3 ECHR.

 3. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 10 July 2019, I  was  alarmed  to
    note  that  the  appellant's  solicitors  had  filed   and   served   a
    supplementary bundle  of  documents  which  purported  to  deal  almost
    exclusively with the question of  the  'Bylock'  telephone  application
    which I had specifically excluded from  consideration  at  the  resumed
    hearing in my error of law decision. Moreover, Mr Sills,  who  appeared
    for the appellant at the resumed hearing, did not have  a  copy  of  my
    error of law decision in his brief. In that decision,  I  attempted  to
    narrow the issues to be determined before the  Upper  Tribunal  at  the
    resumed hearing but my directions appear to have been wholly ignored by
    the appellant's solicitors. I told Mr Sills that  I  intended  only  to
    consider those matters detailed in the error of law decision and  would
    not revisit the question of the telephone application.

 4. I heard evidence from the appellant  who  spoke  in  Turkish  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter. He explained that, as a  senior  student,
    he  had  been  responsible   for   younger   students   in   university
    accommodation. He carried out a pastoral role for these students, which
    included giving them information regarding the Gulen Movement.  Briefly
    cross-examined by Mrs Pettersen, who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
    State, the appellant confirmed that an arrest warrant had  been  issued
    against him that he had continued to  follow  the  Gulen  Movement  sur
    place after arriving in the United Kingdom. In addition, the  appellant
    claims that he is himself mentioned in documents relating to the arrest
    of his sister who both parties accept has been imprisoned on account of
    her involvement in the Gulen Movement.

 5. The problem in this case lies in the fact that the First-tier  Tribunal
    has correctly, for the reasons identified in my error of law  decision,
    disbelieved the appellant's evidence regarding the  'Bylock'  telephone
    application. It was the appellant's claim that use of this  application
    had exposed him to the Turkish authorities as a supporter of the  Gulen
    Movement. The appellant relies on those documents,  in  turn,  to  show
    that  the  Turkish  authorities  have  expressed  an  interest  in  his
    political activities in the past. However, Mrs Pettersen did not submit
    that I should wholly exclude the documents as unreliable evidence.

 6. I remain unpersuaded by the claim that the Turkish authorities would be
    aware that the appellant was using a particular  telephone  application
    if they did not have physical possession of the appellant's  telephone.
    The evidential value  of  the  documents  referring  to  the  telephone
    application must, by any evaluation, be diminished accordingly.  Having
    said that, I am persuaded that, whether or not the Turkish  authorities
    have issued an arrest warrant for this appellant, he  remains  at  real
    risk of ill-treatment should he return to Turkey.

 7. My reasons for reaching that finding as follows. The respondent accepts
    that  the  appellant  is  a  supporter  of  Gulen  Movement  and,  very
    significantly, that the appellant's sister, also a supporter, has  been
    imprisoned.  The  question  in  this  appeal  is  whether  the  Turkish
    authorities would become aware of the appellant's  involvement  in  the
    Gulen Movement (assuming that they have not issued a  warrant  for  his
    arrest hitherto) and, if they became aware, how they would act on  such
    knowledge.  Background  country  materials,  including  the  CPIN   for
    February 2018, provide numerous instances of the  anxious  response  of
    the Turkish authorities to supporters of the Gulen Movement which those
    authorities hold responsible for a major, if failed,  coup  attempt  in
    2016. It would, perhaps, be appropriate to  use  the  expression  'hair
    trigger' to characterise the nature of that response.  Furthermore,  as
    is clear  from  evidence  in  Turkish  appeals  before  United  Kingdom
    immigration tribunals over a number of years, Turkey operates a records
    and surveillance system which is highly  sophisticated.  The  appellant
    submits that, even if no warrant has been issued for  his  own  arrest,
    that system is capable of  linking  him  to  his  imprisoned,  Gulenist
    sister. I find that the background material supports such an assertion.
    Moreover, the appellant has been involved with the Gulen  Movement  for
    many years, attending Gulenist schools and college. I consider that  is
    reasonably likely that some trace of his  involvement  with  the  Gulen
    Movement whilst he has been living in Turkey has been recorded  by  the
    Turkish authorities. On the basis that it has been recorded, I find  it
    also recently likely that such information may be readily retrieved  by
    the Turkish authorities when the appellant re-enters the country.

 8. The question then arises  as  to  how,  if  they  are  aware  that  the
    appellant  is  of  supporter  of  the  Gulen  Movement,   the   Turkish
    authorities will react to that knowledge. I note that as many as 50,000
    individuals have been detained following the failed coup attempt;  that
    it would not take a great deal for  the  authorities  to  add  to  that
    number by arresting the appellant and detaining him  is  not,  in  that
    context,  implausible.  The  CPIN  at  8.2.4  records  that  the   IRIN
    (Integrated Regional  Information  Networks,  a  news  agency  formerly
    linked to the UN) had reported that 'normally, arrests  are  only  done
    when they're needed, but  now  they  arrest  first  and  ask  questions
    later...' There is no evidence to show that the anxiety of the  Turkish
    authorities has lessened with  the  passage  of  time  since  the  coup
    attempt and it would be into  such  circumstances  that  the  appellant
    would return.

 9.  There  is  an  additional  consideration.  Neither  party  doubts  the
    commitment of this  appellant  to  the  Gulen  Movement.  As  Mr  Sills
    submitted, if he did return to Turkey, then the  appellant  would  only
    refrain from continuing his Gulen Movement activities out  of  fear  of
    being persecuted  (see  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC  31).  I  accept  that
    submission and agree that the appellant is entitled to  refugee  status
    on this discreet ground irrespective of any problems he may  face  upon
    entry to Turkey.

10. In the circumstances, I allow the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and
    human rights (Article 3 ECHR) grounds.



Notice of Decision

    I have remade the decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 11 October 2018 is  allowed  on  asylum
    and human rights (Article 3 ECHR) grounds.


Signed                              Date 20 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

