
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12478/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 February 2019                  |On 4 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    AAAD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appeals to the Upper Tribunal against
    a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the
    Secretary of State's refusal, dated 5 December 2019, of his  claim  for
    international protection.

 2. The appellant, a male Sunni Muslim  from  Baghdad,  had  been  accused,
    arrested and released in 2005 following the  assassination  of  a  Shia
    army officer, a crime for which the appellant's brother had been  tried
    and executed. The appellant relocated to Sunni areas of  Iraq  but,  on
    his return to Baghdad in 2009, he was detained and accused of  being  a
    Sunni terrorist. He was held in detention for five  years  until  2014.
    The Secretary of State had rejected the  appellant's  claim  of  having
    been detained but the First-tier Tribunal [30] accepted  that  part  of
    his evidence. The appellant fled to the United Kingdom  via  Turkey  in
    2014/2015. He returned to Iraq (he claims using a  false  identity)  in
    2016, re-entering the United Kingdom in 2017.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the appellant argues  that  the
    judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  take  into   account   relevant
    considerations, including the fact of the appellant's detention  for  5
    years and that he used false documentation on his  return  to  Iraq  in
    2016, when assessing the risk to the appellant should he return now  to
    Iraq. The appellant asserts that, having found the he had been detained
    as claimed and his  brother  executed,  the  judge  then  ignored  that
    finding.

 4. I do not find that the judge has erred in his  assessment  of  risk  on
    return. At [32(i-viii)], the judge has given detailed reasons which  he
    says 'drives' his  finding  that  the  appellant  is  not  at  risk  by
    reference to the  risk  factors  identified  in  the  relevant  country
    guidance (SMO,  KSP and IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq  CG
    [20199] UKUT 400). I do not accept the argument advanced in the grounds
    that, by finding that the  'appellant  and  his  family  have  remained
    unharmed' in the years since 2005, the  judge  has  reached  a  finding
    which is not consistent with his  acceptance  of  the  claim  that  the
    appellant had been detained for 5 years. It is, in my opinion,  obvious
    that the judge  makes  this  statement  subject  to  the  fact  of  the
    detention  to  which  he  immediately  refers  in  the  following  sub-
    paragraph. Moreover, it  is  also  necessary  to  have  regard  to  the
    specific finding which the judge made concerning the detention at [31].
    The judge finds that the appellant was detained 'on  a  fishing  trip',
    those detaining him seeking to determine whether the appellant  was  of
    interest as a security threat. When his captors concluded that  he  was
    not, his detention had continued until a bribe might be  extracted  for
    his release and for no other reason at all. When the  judge  says  that
    the appellant had not been 'harmed' since 2005 it is clear that he  had
    those circumstances of the appellant's detention in  mind.  Ultimately,
    the appellant had remained in detention for the financial gain  of  his
    captors and not because of the 'family of the man whom [the appellant's
    brother} had been convicted of killing seeking revenge' [32].

 5. Secondly, the appellant asserts that the judge failed to make reference
    to the precautions taken by the  appellant  (including  using  a  false
    identity) when discussing his return to Iraq in 2016.  In  my  opinion,
    the judge was well aware of those precautions.  His  finding  regarding
    the  2016  return  is  specific;  it  is  that,   notwithstanding   any
    precautions the appellant may have taken, the fact that he returned  at
    all undermines his claim to have a subjective fear of living  in  Iraq.
    That finding is rational, was available to the judge  on  the  evidence
    and is sound in law.

 6. Thirdly, the appellant complains that the judge refers to his brother M
    continuing to live in Baghdad whilst failing to refer to the fact  that
    M is elderly, no longer of  fighting  age  and  unlikely  to  'fit  the
    profile of a suspected Sunni terrorist.' The appellant  claims  that  a
    comparison between his own circumstances and those of M is consequently
    unfair. I disagree. I find that it was open to the judge to  find  that
    the presence of M in Baghdad undermines the appellant's claim  that  he
    fears returning to live in that city. Significantly, M  had,  like  the
    appellant, also been detained, in his case for 2 years,  after  he  had
    been 'abducted' in 2008. The judge finds that, like  the  appellant,  M
    had not been of any interest to any state/non-state actor [32(ii)]. The
    detention and release of M and his ability to live  safely  in  Baghdad
    thereafter is a patently strong indicator that the appellant would also
    not be at risk.  The  judge  did  not  err  in  law  by  comparing  the
    circumstances of the two brothers in assessing risk to the appellant on
    return to Iraq.

 7. Finally, the appellant argues that the judge ignored two  of  the  risk
    factors identified in SMO, namely: '(i)  Opposition to or criticism of
    the GOI, the KRG or local security actors; and (ii)   Membership of  a
    national, ethnic or religious group which is either in the minority  in
    the area in question, or not in de facto control of that  area'  [314].
    As regards (i), the grounds ignore the  particular  finding  which  the
    judge made in respect of the appellant's detention, that  is  that  the
    appellant turned out never to have been a security threat and had  been
    kept in detention for the financial gain of  his  captors  and  for  no
    other reason; the appellant, therefore, has never been critical  of  or
    'in opposition to ... the GOI,  the  KRG  or  local  security  actors.'
    Further, if the appellant has the characteristics  described  in  (ii),
    those characteristics are shared by his brother  M,  who  continues  to
    live safely and unmolested in Baghdad.

 8. For the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that  the  judge  has  not
    erred in law. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 25 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
