
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12029/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 August 2017                     |On 16 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AGN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Blair, instructed by Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AGN, was born in 1971 and is a male  citizen  of  Libya.
    Having accepted submissions made by the appellant in  July  2014  as  a
    fresh claim, the respondent refused that claim by a decision  dated  18
    October 2016.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Moan) which, in a decision promulgated on 28 April 2017, dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. I was assisted by both representatives at the Upper  Tribunal  hearing,
    but in particular Mr Mills, who appeared for the respondent.   He  told
    me that the Secretary of State considered that the judge had  erred  in
    law because it was not clear that the judge  had  applied  the  correct
    standard of proof.  At [28], for example, the judge had stated that  he
    was "satisfied, on balance, that the appellant's brother works for  the
    SDF ...".  Such occasional infelicities of expression in the course  of
    an analysis may be excused if it is clear  from  a  decision  that  the
    judge was aware of and indicated clearly that he/she  had  applied  the
    correct standard of proof.  This was not such a case.  Setting out "the
    applicable law" the judge wrote at [9]:

         The question of  whether  a  person  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for a Geneva Convention reason will be looked at in the
         round in the light of all the  relevant  circumstances  and  judged
         against the situation as at the time of the appeal hearing.

 3. Whilst there was  nothing  wrong  with  that  statement,  it  does  not
    indicate the correct standard  of  proof  in  any  asylum  appeal.   My
    reading of the decision leads me to believe that the judge has  applied
    a standard of the balance  of  probabilities  rather  than  that  of  a
    reasonable likelihood.  In the circumstances, I set aside the  decision
    of the judge and have re-made the decision.

 4. In re-making the decision, I retain the finding which the judge made at
    [28] that the appellant's brother works for the SDF (Special  Deterrent
    Force).  Mr Mills did not object to my doing so.  The other findings of
    the judge are set aside.  I am aware that by preserving that finding  I
    have done so notwithstanding the fact that the same paragraph  contains
    the error of law which I have identified above.  However, in the  light
    of Mr Mills' agreement, I am prepared to retain the finding.

 5. Since the First-tier Tribunal issued  its  decision,  country  guidance
    jurisprudence for Libya has moved on.  We now have the benefit  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG  [2017]  UKUT
    263 (IAC).  The head note reads as follows:


         "The violence in Libya has reached such a high level that
         substantial grounds are shown for believing that a returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject to a
         threat to his life or person."

 6. In the light of ZMM, I allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

 7. The appellant wishes to pursue  his  asylum  appeal.   Given  that  the
    judge's error goes to the nature of his credibility findings, there  is
    no alternative but for there to be a fresh fact-finding exercise  which
    is best conducted in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 28 April 2017 is
    set aside.  None of the findings of  fact  shall  stand  save  for  the
    finding [28] that the appellant's brother works for  the  SDF  (Special
    Deterrent Force).

 9. I have re-made the decision in respect of humanitarian protection.  The
    appellant's appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

10. The appeal on asylum and human rights  (Articles  2/3/8  ECHR)  grounds
    shall be determined in the First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Moan)  to
    which Tribunal this appeal is now returned.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 15 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 15 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
