
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12244/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th January 2019                 |On 11th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    T T B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Quadi of Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a female Vietnamese citizen born 15th  February  1991.
    She appealed against a decision of Judge Richards-Clarke (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 12th June 2018.

 2. The Appellant made a human rights claim and a claim  for  international
    protection.  Her son born 8th May 2013 is a dependant in her claim.

 3. The Appellant's claim for international  protection  was  made  on  the
    basis that she had been the victim of human trafficking  and  therefore
    was a member of a particular social group.  In  summary  the  Appellant
    explained that she came to the UK on 13th December 2011  as  a  Tier  4
    student.  She had married in Vietnam in June 2009.  In addition to  her
    son who was born in the UK, the Appellant and her husband have  another
    son born 24th December 2009.

 4. The Appellant had arrived in the UK without her husband.   She  claimed
    that he became jealous and he had physically abused her while  she  was
    in Vietnam.  In June 2012 the Appellant's husband and eldest  son  came
    to the UK.  On arrival the husband joined some Vietnamese  friends  and
    set up a cannabis factory.  The husband started to abuse the  Appellant
    and demanded that she cease her studies and use her parents'  money  to
    invest in the cannabis factory.

 5. The couple moved to London with the husband  still  being  involved  in
    cannabis factories.  He told the Appellant to contact her  parents  and
    obtain further funds.  When the Appellant refused her husband  returned
    to Vietnam taking the eldest son with him and  the  Appellant  has  not
    seen her son since.

 6. In Vietnam the appellant's husband and  his  associates  contacted  her
    parents to request further funds to subsidise the Appellant's education
    in the UK.  Her parents took out a  substantial  loan  to  provide  the
    money.

 7. Thereafter the husband returned to the UK and the  Appellant  was  held
    against her will and was under the  control  of  her  husband  and  his
    criminal associates.

 8. When the Appellant attempted to  escape,  she  was  discovered  by  her
    husband who raped her in  front  of  other  men  who  also  raped  her.
    Following the rape, the  Appellant  became  pregnant  and  the  husband
    refused to accept that the baby was his.

 9. In mid-2014 one of the cannabis factories was raided by the police  and
    the Appellant's husband was convinced that the Appellant  had  informed
    the police.  She was told that she would have to  pay  back  the  money
    that was lost in the raid by working in one of the  cannabis  factories
    or working as a prostitute.

10. Shortly after this the Appellant managed to escape, together  with  her
    son, and sought help from her half-brother in Bristol.  The Appellant's
    parents told her that loan sharks had attended their  home  in  Vietnam
    and threatened them on numerous occasions.

11. The Appellant claimed asylum on 3rd August 2015.  In September 2015 the
    Appellant was referred to the National  Referral  Mechanism.   On  10th
    November 2017 the Competent Authority concluded that the Appellant  had
    been the victim  of  human  trafficking.   She  was  therefore  granted
    discretionary leave from 10th November 2017  until  9th  November  2018
    because she  was  receiving  ongoing  treatment  as  a  result  of  her
    experience as a victim of human trafficking.

12. On the same  date,  the  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights claim.  The reasons  for  this
    decision are contained in a letter dated 10th November 2017 which  runs
    to 25 pages.  In very brief  summary  the  Respondent  noted  that  the
    Appellant held a student visa valid between 7th November 2011 and  12th
    October 2012.  The Respondent accepted the Appellant's nationality.  It
    was not accepted that she was the member of a particular  social  group
    as the Respondent's view is that trafficking  victims  do  not  have  a
    distinct  social  identity  in  Vietnam.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been the victim of trafficking and that her  husband  had
    intended to force her into  prostitution  or  forced  labour.   It  was
    accepted that the Appellant had a genuine subjective fear on return  to
    Vietnam as her  husband  had  threatened  that  her  parents  would  be
    attacked, and that if the Appellant returned to Vietnam  she  would  be
    sold into prostitution in China or she would be made to transport drugs
    to Laos.

13. The Respondent considered that there is in  Vietnam  a  sufficiency  of
    protection provided by the authorities, and the  Appellant  could  also
    relocate to a different area in Vietnam where she would not be at risk.
     The Respondent placed reliance upon the Upper Tribunal decision Nguyen
    [2015] UKUT 170 (IAC) in which it was held that a victim of trafficking
    would be able to return to Vietnam without being of adverse interest to
    the government,  and  the  chance  of  the  person  coming  across  the
    traffickers is very slight.  It was also found in paragraph 52 of  that
    decision that there is a sufficiency of protection in Vietnam.

14. The Respondent therefore did not accept, because of  the  existence  of
    sufficiency  of  protection  from  the  authorities  and  a  reasonable
    internal relocation option, that the  Appellant  had  proved  that  she
    would be at risk if returned to Vietnam, and did not accept that if the
    Appellant and her son returned  to  Vietnam,  that  this  would  breach
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.

15. The appeal was heard on 24th May 2018.  The judge found  the  Appellant
    to be  a  vulnerable  witness  because  she  had  been  the  victim  of
    trafficking,  and  had  mental  health  issues.   It  was  agreed  that
    credibility was not in issue, and the appeal proceeded on the basis  of
    submissions only.

16. The judge found the Appellant would be able to turn to  her  family  in
    Vietnam for support and that there existed in Vietnam a sufficiency  of
    protection from the authorities.  It was also found that the  Appellant
    had a reasonable internal relocation option.  The appeal was  dismissed
    on all grounds.

17. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon three grounds.  Firstly, it was submitted the judge  erred
    by finding the Appellant would receive support from her  parents.   The
    Appellant's evidence was not  disputed  by  the  Respondent,  and  this
    evidence was to the effect  that  her  parents  were  indebted  to  her
    previous traffickers, had  been  forced  to  sell  their  business  and
    mortgage their  house,  and  continued  to  receive  threats  from  the
    traffickers/loan sharks who regularly attended their property.

18. Secondly, it was contended  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  properly
    consider or  make  findings  on  the  expert  and  supporting  evidence
    regarding risk on return and internal relocation.  The  judge  did  not
    make findings upon a country expert report, and did not explain why the
    expert opinion was rejected.  It was contended that the judge  had  not
    taken into account  a  psychiatric  report  which  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant suffers with PTSD and  depressive  disorder.   The  Appellant
    would struggle to gain employment or support herself and her son  given
    her acute vulnerability, and it was contended that the  judge  had  not
    referred to or analysed this evidence.  It was not clear why the  judge
    had preferred evidence relied on by the Respondent as  opposed  to  the
    evidence relied upon by the Appellant.

19. The third ground contended that the judge failed to  properly  consider
    or  make  findings  upon  the  expert  and  supporting  evidence  which
    corroborates  the  inadequacy  of  state  protection  for  victims   of
    trafficking.  Again, the judge had preferred evidence given  on  behalf
    of the Respondent without explaining why the Appellant's  evidence  was
    not accepted.

20. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Haria of the FtT who found it
    arguable that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    findings.

Error of Law

21. On 12th October 2018 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation
    to error of law, and concluded that the judge's decision  must  be  set
    aside.  I set out below paragraphs 20-28 of my error  of  law  decision
    dated 16th October 2018;

         "20. The Respondent concedes that Ground 1 discloses  an  error  of
             law, and in my view that concession is rightly made.   I  must
             decide whether the error is material.

         21.  In my view the judge at paragraph  28,  in  finding  that  the
             Appellant would be able to turn to her family in  Vietnam  for
             support, does not take into account the evidence given by  the
             Appellant, which was not challenged.  This was to  the  effect
             that her parents were now indebted to the previous traffickers
             (as the judge did acknowledge).  They had been forced to  sell
             their business and mortgage their  house.   The  evidence  was
             that threats continued to be  received  from  individuals  who
             regularly attended the property of  the  Appellant's  parents.
             Therefore her parents would be unable to provide the financial
             support referred to by the judge at paragraph  28  which  they
             had previously provided to the Appellant,  and  the  Appellant
             would be at risk if she returned to the family home in Vietnam
             as it was visited by those involved in trafficking.

         22.  I find this to be a material error as in the Respondent's CPIN
             published in November 2016 at 2.3.5, one of the  factors  that
             indicates an increased risk of being abused  or  re-trafficked
             is the absence of a supportive  family  willing  to  take  the
             victim  back  into  the  family  unit.   One  of  the  factors
             indicating a lower  risk  of  being  abused  or  re-trafficked
             includes the availability of a supportive  family  willing  to
             take the person back into the family unit.

         23.  Grounds 2 and 3  challenge  findings  made  by  the  judge  in
             relation to internal relocation and sufficiency of protection.
              The judge does deal with internal relocation and  sufficiency
             of protection relatively briefly at paragraph 29.   The  judge
             accepts at paragraph 25  that  the  Appellant  has  moderately
             severe PTSD and a moderately  severe  depressive  illness  for
             which she  is  receiving  treatment  in  the  UK.   The  judge
             concludes that  the  authorities  in  Vietnam  can  provide  a
             sufficiency of protection and there is a  reasonable  internal
             relocation option which would not be unduly harsh.   As  noted
             by  Mr  Howells  the  judge  had  in  paragraphs  previous  to
             paragraph 29, made reference to the evidence  relied  upon  by
             the parties.  It is evident from paragraph 29 that  the  judge
             prefers  the  evidence  given  in  the  Respondent's  CPIN  of
             November 2016, and  the  decision  in  Nguyen  to  the  expert
             reports relied upon by the Appellant, and  the  2017  Refworld
             report and 2016 USSD report.

         24.  What is not made clear, in my view, is why the  judge  prefers
             the Respondent's evidence, and attaches very little weight  to
             the evidence relied upon by the Appellant.  I  set  out  below
             the headnote to Budhathoki (reasons for decision) [2014]  UKUT
             00341 (IAC);

                  "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier
                  Tribunal judgments  to  rehearse  every  detail  or  issue
                  raised in a case.  This leads to judgments becoming overly
                  long and confused and is not a proportionate  approach  to
                  deciding cases.  It is, however, necessary for  judges  to
                  identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence  and
                  explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that
                  the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

         25.  In this case there is a conflict of evidence  in  relation  to
             sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal   relocation.    If
             evidence relied upon by one party is preferred to the evidence
             relied upon by the other party, the  judge  must  explain  why
             that is the case, so that the losing party knows why they have
             lost.

         26.  Paragraph 29 does not  make  it  clear  why  the  Respondent's
             evidence is preferred.  It is not clear why no weight has been
             given to the evidence relied upon by the Appellant.  That is a
             material error of law.

         27.  Therefore the decision of the FtT is set aside.  The  decision
             needs to be remade.  It  is  not  appropriate  to  remit  this
             appeal back  to  the  FtT.   I  have  considered  whether  the
             decision can be remade without a further hearing  and  I  have
             decided that would not be appropriate.

         28.  There will be a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal.   I
             have decided there should be a further  hearing  because  both
             parties have stated that there  is  further  updated  evidence
             that should be considered.  The next hearing before the  Upper
             Tribunal will be for  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  the
             Appellant would  be  at  risk  if  returned  to  Vietnam,  and
             specific consideration will be given to  whether  there  is  a
             sufficiency of protection and reasonable  internal  relocation
             option."





Re-making the Decision

22. At the resumed hearing the Appellant attended but  was  not  called  to
    give  oral  evidence.   I  ascertained  that   I   had   received   all
    documentation upon which the parties intended to rely,  and  that  each
    party had served the other with any documentation upon  which  reliance
    was to be placed.  I had the Respondent's bundle that had  been  before
    the FtT, which has annexes A-C together  with  the  Appellant's  bundle
    which had been before the FtT which has sections A-E.  The  Appellant's
    representatives had served a supplementary bundle which  had  not  been
    before the FtT, containing sections SA and  SB.   Mr  Howells  had  not
    received the addendum expert report dated 16th  January  2019  and  was
    provided with this.  Mr Howells had not seen my error of  law  decision
    and a copy was provided.

23. Mr Howells produced the Respondent's  Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note ( the CPIN) on victims of trafficking in Vietnam  dated  September
    2018, the Country Policy and Information Note on fear of illegal  money
    lenders  in  Vietnam  dated  December  2018,  and  a  Response  to   an
    Information Request in relation to mental health care in Vietnam  dated
    8th October 2017.  Miss Quadi submitted her skeleton  argument  running
    to 22 pages, and containing 106 paragraphs.

24. The hearing proceeded  when  the  representatives  had  considered  the
    documentation.  There was no application for an adjournment.

25. I heard oral  submissions.   Both  representatives  made  lengthy  oral
    submissions which I have recorded in my Record of Proceedings and  will
    not reiterate here.  I will summarise very briefly the oral submissions
    that were made.

26. Mr Howells placed reliance upon the  CPIN  document  submitted  at  the
    hearing.  He placed reliance  upon  the  objective  evidence  contained
    therein.  It was  submitted  that  this  is  up-to-date  evidence,  and
    confirms that there is in Vietnam a sufficiency of protection  provided
    by the authorities.

27. It was also submitted that the objective evidence  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant could relocate within Vietnam, and support was available, and
    such an internal relocation would not be unduly harsh.

28. It was further submitted that  the  Appellant  confirmed  in  her  most
    recent witness statement  that  she  is  not  currently  receiving  any
    treatment in relation  to  her  mental  health,  but  is  taking  anti-
    depressant  medication.   Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the   objective
    evidence showed that mental health  treatment  would  be  available  in
    Vietnam.

29. It was therefore submitted that the Appellant had not proved  that  she
    would be at risk in Vietnam.  With reference to  Article  8,  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's son would be to remain  with  his  mother.
    It was not accepted that the Appellant had proved that there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to her integration in Vietnam, and therefore
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was not satisfied.

30. In  making  oral  submissions  Miss  Quadi  relied  upon  her  skeleton
    argument.  I  was  asked  to  note  that  the  Respondent  accepts  the
    Appellant has been a victim of trafficking.

31. It was submitted that the Appellant would not have  family  support  if
    returned and would be at risk of being trafficked again.  The Appellant
    is vulnerable and the medical evidence indicates that she suffers  from
    PTSD and depression.

32. It was argued that the Appellant is a member  of  a  particular  social
    group as a victim of trafficking.

33. I was reminded that the Respondent had not challenged  the  Appellant's
    credibility.  It should therefore be accepted  that  her  parents  were
    indebted to her former traffickers.

34. Miss Quadi pointed out that the expert confirmed that  the  Appellant's
    husband has two uncles with close ties to  the  Vietnamese  government,
    one who is the vice chairman of the  Ministry  of  Transport,  and  the
    other who is the director of the Transportation Department for Nghe  An
    Province.  Therefore, these  individuals  would  seek  to  protect  the
    husband from any criminal sanctions in Vietnam.

35. Reliance was placed upon  the  expert  report  in  submitting  that  in
    practice there is no sufficiency  of  protection  in  Vietnam,  and  no
    reasonable  internal  relocation  option.   With  reference  to  mental
    healthcare, reference was made  to  the  Information  Response  Request
    produced by the Respondent, which  referred  to  most  hospitals  being
    outdated and facing chronic overcrowding, with  much  of  the  existing
    medical equipment  in  public  hospitals  being  obsolete  and  needing
    replacement.  The budget provided  by  the  Vietnamese  state  for  the
    health sector has increased but is  still  too  low  to  meet  demands.
    There is a shortage of qualified medical staff in  many  hospitals.   I
    was asked to allow the appeal.

36. At the conclusion of oral submissions, I reserved my decision.

My Conclusion and Reasons

37. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral  and  documentary
    that has been supplied and have considered that evidence in the  round.
    In relation to risk on return the burden of proof is on the  Appellant,
    to the lower standard, that being a reasonable degree of likelihood.

38. The parties  have  agreed  that  credibility  is  not  in  dispute.   I
    therefore record  that  the  Appellant  has  been  a  victim  of  human
    trafficking.   This  occurred  when  she  was  in  the  UK,   and   the
    perpetrators were her husband and his associates.

39. I accept the Appellant has been in the UK since December 2011, and  she
    lives with her son who was born in the UK and is now 5  years  of  age.
    The whereabouts of the  Appellant's  husband  and  her  elder  son  are
    unknown.  I find that the  Appellant's  parents  are  indebted  to  the
    traffickers.  It is not suggested by the Respondent that the  Appellant
    can safely return to her home area, and I  accept  that  the  Appellant
    would be at risk from her traffickers if she did return to her home.

40. In considering sufficiency of protection and internal relocation I must
    take into account the Appellant's mental health.   Dr  Battersby  is  a
    consultant psychiatrist who interviewed the Appellant on 10th  February
    2018 and 19th February 2018.  Dr Battersby confirms that the  Appellant
    is suffering from  moderately  severe  PTSD  and  a  moderately  severe
    depressive  illness.   Dr  Battersby  confirms  that  the   Appellant's
    condition is unchanged from a previous report  that  she  had  written,
    despite having had approximately a  year  of  psychological  input.  Dr
    Battersby  had  previously  interviewed  the  Appellant  in  2015.   Dr
    Battersby confirmed at page 17 of her  report  that  in  her  view  the
    Appellant's prognosis is that it is likely that she  will  never  fully
    recover from her PTSD although she  may  make  some  improvements.   Dr
    Battersby comments that she  is  concerned  about  how  frequently  the
    Appellant  disassociated  during  their  interview  and  during   those
    episodes she was unable to take in or process information, and when she
    became aware of where she was, she could not remember the last question
    she was asked.  Dr Battersby comments that the Appellant is  likely  to
    disassociate more frequently when under stress.  Dr Battersby  comments
    at page 23 of her  report  that  the  Appellant  has  little  emotional
    resilience and easily becomes overwhelmed by her emotions.  At page  24
    of the report Dr Battersby, says  that  the  Appellant's  frequency  of
    disassociation is some of the most extreme she has  observed.  I  place
    weight upon Dr Battersby's report.

41. Also contained within the Appellant's bundle  is  a  letter  dated  9th
    January 2018 from Dr  Jessica  Munafo  a  clinical  psychologist.   She
    confirms working with the Appellant from September 2017  until  January
    2018.  The Appellant was initially  referred  to  Primary  Care  Mental
    Health Services in October 2016 and referred for more specialist  input
    for her trauma symptoms in January 2017.  She  was  then  seen  for  an
    extended period of stabilisation work by Dr Roberts  from  February  to
    June 2017.

42. Dr Munafo describes the Appellant as "quite vulnerable".  She  comments
    that an unsuccessful asylum claim  would  likely  lead  to  an  extreme
    exacerbation of the PTSD symptoms, an increase  in  suicidal  ideation,
    and a risk to her son's safety and wellbeing.  Dr  Munafo  confirms  in
    her letter that the Avon and Wiltshire Mental Health Partnership  Trust
    would only be able to provide a further two sessions  of  treatment  to
    the Appellant due to restrictions on the total number of sessions  that
    can be offered, after which referral to Voluntary Sector Services  will
    be made.  At the time  of  writing  it  was  Dr  Munafo's  professional
    opinion that the Appellant requires further trauma work and this  could
    be accessed via an organisation such as Trauma  Foundation  South  West
    although it is understood there is currently  a  twelve  month  waiting
    list.  Dr Munafo confirms that the Appellant presents with symptoms  of
    PTSD, with associated features of shame, depressive  symptoms  such  as
    low mood, selfcare difficulties, suicidal ideation and social  anxiety.
    I place weight upon Dr Munafo's opinion.

43. I accept that the  current  position  is  that  the  Appellant  is  not
    receiving counselling but is in receipt of  anti-depressant  medication
    and is receiving support from her general practitioner who has  advised
    that she needs further therapy and she has  been  referred  to  Bristol
    Therapies and is waiting to receive a letter  from  that  organisation.
    The Appellant's mental health condition has not been  disputed  by  the
    Respondent.

44. What is disputed is whether the Appellant can claim to be the member of
    a particular social group.  In my view Vietnamese women who are victims
    of  trafficking  can  form  a  particular  social  group.   The   UNHCR
    guidelines on international protection, victims of trafficking confirms
    that victims of  trafficking  can  fall  within  the  definition  of  a
    refugee.  AZ (trafficked women) Thailand CG [2010] UKUT 118,  confirmed
    that former victims of trafficking are capable of being  members  of  a
    particular social group owing to their shared past experience of having
    been trafficked.  I am satisfied that trafficked victims do  possess  a
    distinct  social  identity  in  Vietnam  and  my  conclusion  is   that
    Vietnamese women who have been the victim  of  traffickers  do  form  a
    particular social group.

45. In assessing sufficiency of protection, I take into  account  that  the
    Appellant would not  receive  the  support  from  her  family  who  are
    indebted to the traffickers.  I follow the guidance in  Horvath  [2000]
    UKHL 37 in which it was found that  there  must  be  in  force  in  the
    country in question a criminal law which makes the violent  attacks  by
    the persecutors punishable by sentences commensurate with  the  gravity
    of the crimes.  The victims as a class must  not  be  exempt  from  the
    protection of the law.  There must be a reasonable willingness  by  the
    law enforcement agencies, that is to say  the  police  and  courts,  to
    detect, prosecute and punish offenders.

46. I take into account the expert report dated 9th February 2018  prepared
    by Dr Tran and the addendum to that report dated 16th January 2019.  Dr
    Tran is firmly of the opinion that the authorities  in  Vietnam  cannot
    provide a sufficiency of protection to the Appellant, and  there  would
    be no reasonable internal relocation option.

47. I also take into account the CPIN  dated  September  2018  relating  to
    victims of trafficking, and in particular section 2.5 which relates  to
    protection.  Vietnam has comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation and
    prosecutes those involved in trafficking.  There were  244  convictions
    in 2017.  The sentences imposed range from 2 to 30 years' imprisonment.

48. However, it is confirmed at 2.5.3 that  while  legislation  exists  and
    prosecutions occur, a lack of co-ordination across provincial  agencies
    and poor understanding of the relevant legislation  reportedly  results
    in uneven enforcement of the law.  Budgetary constraints also  preclude
    some local authorities from  pursuing  trafficking  cases  in  isolated
    parts of the country.

49. I take into account the decision in Nguyen but note that this is not  a
    country guidance case, and the Upper Tribunal in that case were dealing
    with a US State Department trafficking in persons report dated 2010.

50. I must consider the particular circumstances  of  the  Appellant.   She
    cannot return to her home area and would not  receive  assistance  from
    her family.  She is vulnerable and has a 5  year  old  child.   I  must
    consider where she would live.  The CPIN of  September  2018  at  8.4.1
    refers to the Asia Foundation recording that when  trafficking  victims
    return to Vietnam they face tremendous difficulty in reintegrating into
    their communities.  They are stigmatised by society and traumatised  by
    their experience and generally do not have  the  education  and  skills
    necessary for gainful employment.  These women are at a  high  risk  of
    being re-trafficked.

51. Therefore the Respondent's own guidance indicates a high  risk  of  re-
    trafficking.  At 2.5.5 of the CPIN there is reference to  the  Ministry
    of  Labour  Invalids  and  Social  Affairs  providing  protection   and
    reintegration support  and  operating  400  social  protection  centres
    through local authorities which provide services to  a  wide  range  of
    vulnerable groups, including trafficking victims.   However,  the  CPIN
    states that these centres are  reported  to  be  unevenly  staffed  and
    resourced and lack appropriately trained personnel to assist victims.

52. At paragraph 7 of Dr Tran's addendum report there is reference  to  the
    social protection centres. Dr Tran confirms that these provide shelter,
    care  and  food  for  people  with  serious  mental  health  illnesses,
    abandoned  newborn  children,  and  the  abandoned  (without  children)
    elderly parents/people.  Dr Tran points out that  these  centres  would
    only be available to the Appellant if she was recognised  as  a  person
    with a serious mental illness such as lacking capacity to  conduct  her
    own activities such as eating and toileting.  Dr Tran  notes  that  the
    Appellant suffers from PTSD and depression and comments that  it  would
    therefore be unlikely that the Appellant will be able  to  access  this
    support  in  Vietnam  as  she  would  not  be  regarded  as  having   a
    sufficiently serious mental illness.

53. There is reference within the  background  information  to  trafficking
    victims receiving financial support.  Dr Tran at paragraph  10  of  the
    addendum report points out that this amounts to only �50.

54. Although there is evidence of  prosecutions  of  human  traffickers  in
    Vietnam, I find that the background evidence supplied by both  parties,
    indicates that in the particular case of the  Appellant,  it  has  been
    shown  to  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  sufficiency  of
    protection would not be provided by the authorities.

55. In considering internal relocation, I must consider whether this  is  a
    reasonable option.  I find that it is not.  I make this  finding  based
    in  part  upon  the  Appellant's  vulnerability,  her   mental   health
    difficulties, the fact that she would not have support from her family,
    and  the  lack  of  suitable  accommodation   and   mental   healthcare
    facilities.

56. With reference  to  mental  healthcare,  the  Response  to  Information
    Request at 1.1.1 describes Vietnam having a commendable national mental
    health programme but "the services available currently cover  only  30%
    of communes and treatment  is  available  only  for  schizophrenia  and
    epilepsy."  It is however also stated that generalised anxiety disorder
    was added to the  list  of  mental  illnesses  eligible  for  treatment
    through the national health programme,  and  this  would  include  most
    depression related mental health illnesses.

57. The same Response to Information Request does, as pointed out on behalf
    of the Appellant, make reference to most hospitals being  outdated  and
    having to deal with chronic overcrowding.  Hospitals  in  major  cities
    like Ho Chi Minh and Hanoi often do not have the capacity to serve both
    local and provincial patients.  Much of the existing medical  equipment
    in  public  hospitals  is  obsolete  and  needs  replacement  and  many
    hospitals lack sufficient equipment  for  surgery  and  intensive  care
    units.  There  is  a  shortage  of  qualified  medical  staff  in  many
    hospitals and the total budget for the health centre has increased  but
    is still too low to meet the demands.

58. I therefore conclude that some of the objective evidence relied upon by
    the Respondent does in fact support the views of Dr Tran,  in  relation
    to mental health facilities in Vietnam, and the difficulties  that  the
    Appellant would face in finding accommodation.

59. My conclusion, taking into account the lower standard of proof which is
    a reasonable degree of likelihood, is that  it  has  been  proved  that
    there would not be a sufficiency of protection for the  Appellant,  and
    she would not have a reasonable internal relocation option in  Vietnam.
    As I conclude that she is a member of a particular social group I  find
    that she is entitled to a  grant  of  asylum.   She  is  therefore  not
    entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

60. If the Appellant was not the member of a particular social group I find
    that she would be  entitled  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection
    because of the risk that she would face if returned to Vietnam.  I also
    conclude that the Appellant would be at risk of  treatment  that  would
    breach Article 3 of the 1950 Convention, and that she would be at  risk
    of inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment if returned to Vietnam.

61. Turning to consider Article 8 I find that the Appellant has established
    a private life in the UK and she has family life  with  her  son.   The
    best interests of the son would be served by remaining with his mother.
     It is not claimed that  the  Appellant  can  satisfy  Appendix  FM  in
    relation to family life and I find that to be the case.  The son is not
    a qualifying child as he is not  a  British  citizen  and  he  has  not
    accrued seven years' continuous residence.

62. I consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which entails the Appellant  proving
    that there would be very significant obstacles to her integration  into
    Vietnam.  In considering this  I  follow  the  guidance  in  Treebhawon
    [2017] UKUT 0013 (IAC) in which it was found that mere  hardship,  mere
    difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval and  mere  inconvenience,  even
    when multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the test of  very  significant
    obstacles.

63. In relation to integration I follow the guidance in Kamara [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 813.  This confirms that there must be a broad evaluative judgment.
     It must be considered whether an individual is enough of an insider in
    terms of understanding how life in the society in the country of return
    is carried on.  The individual must have the capacity to participate in
    life in that country and have a reasonable opportunity to  be  accepted
    there and operate on a day-to-day basis.  The individual must  be  able
    to build up within a reasonable time a variety of  human  relationships
    to give substance to their private or family life.

64.  I  conclude  that  the  Appellant  has  proved  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration.  Her vulnerability and mental
    health difficulties are a significant factor.  There is also  the  fact
    that she has previously been the victim of  human  trafficking,  and  I
    find that there would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection,  nor  a
    reasonable internal relocation option available to her.  She would  not
    be able to access family support for the reasons explained earlier.

65. In considering Article 8 I have taken into account section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest.  On this point
    it is relevant that I find that the Appellant  is  entitled  to  asylum
    because she would be at risk in Vietnam, and  she  satisfies  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  It is in the public  interest  that  a  person  seeking
    leave to remain can speak English and is financially independent.   The
    Appellant has not proved  that  she  can  speak  English,  nor  is  she
    financially independent.  These are considerations that  I  have  taken
    into account.

66. I also place little weight upon the private life that the Appellant has
    established while in the  UK  with  a  precarious  immigration  status.
    Notwithstanding these findings, my overall conclusion is that to remove
    the Appellant from the UK would be disproportionate  and  a  breach  of
    Article 8, given the risk that I find she  would  face,  and  that  she
    satisfies paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

I allow the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  Therefore, the  Appellant
is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I allow the Appellant's appeal on human rights  grounds  with  reference  to
Articles 3 and 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 5th February 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable so there is no fee award.  If a  fee  had
been paid or payable I would not have made a fee award  as  the  appeal  has
been allowed because of evidence presented to  the  Tribunal  that  was  not
before the initial decision-maker.


Signed                              Date 5th February 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



















