
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12484/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 16 March 2021                    |On: 25 March 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               blanche muesse
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, instructed by Sentinel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo
      (DRC), born on 7 August 2000. She has been given permission to  appeal
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her  appeal
      against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  her  asylum  and  human
      rights claim.

   3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 27 September  2013  and
      claimed asylum  on  2  October  2013.  The  basis  of  her  claim,  as
      originally made, was that her family had  been  targeted  in  the  DRC
      because of her father's political activities with the UDPS. Her father
      had been a follower of Tshisekedi and an opponent  of  the  government
      and she had delivered newspapers and leaflets for her  father  from  a
      young age. Her father was arrested in June 2013 when soldiers came  to
      their house and told her that they intended to  arrest  her  as  well.
      They took her father away and he had not been seen since. She went  to
      stay with her uncle for two weeks, together with her siblings but  her
      uncle sent her siblings to other people's houses because he said  that
      he could not keep all of them. He arranged for her to come to the  UK.



   4. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim on 27 October  2014,
      did not accept her account to be credible and considered that she  was
      at no risk on return to the DRC. However, the  appellant  was  granted
      leave to remain as an unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child,  until  26
      April 2017. An appeal against the decision to refuse her asylum  claim
      was lodged and, whilst there was subsequently an indication  that  the
      appeal was not being pursued by the appellant,  there  was  no  formal
      withdrawal before the Tribunal and the appeal was therefore determined
      in her absence and dismissed on 6 July 2015.

   5. On 14 June 2017 the appellant's aunt applied on her behalf for further
      leave to remain. The application  was  refused  in  a  decision  of  9
      November 2017, in which the respondent maintained the refusal  of  the
      appellant's asylum claim and concluded that she  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) and that there were no exceptional
      circumstances outside the immigration rules.

   6. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Oliver on  4  January  2018  and  was  dismissed  in  a
      decision promulgated on 29 January 2018. However,  that  decision  was
      set aside in the Upper Tribunal on 7 August 2018 on the  grounds  that
      Judge Oliver had failed to take account of the  appellant's  age  when
      assessing  credibility.  The  case  was  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be heard afresh.

   7. The appeal was then heard by Judge Greasley on 3 July 2019. The appeal
      was no longer pursued on protection grounds, but  only  on  Article  8
      human rights grounds. The appellant gave evidence  before  the  judge,
      stating that she was 18 years of age and had been living in the UK for
      six years with her aunt and cousins who were now her family  and  were
      very close. She had had no contact with her father or  siblings  since
      leaving the DRC and did not know what had happened to them.  Her  aunt
      had travelled to the DRC in 2014 but was not able to locate them.  Her
      mother had left the family home when she (the appellant) was about  10
      years of age to go on a business trip  and  had  never  returned.  The
      appellant's aunt stated that in April 2019 she  had  received  a  call
      from the UDPS to say that they believed that  the  appellant's  father
      had been killed. The appellant still feared returning to the DRC.  The
      appellant claimed to have travelled to the UK with  a  lady  known  as
      Ruth and they had been met at Victoria bus station by her aunt who had
      not known that she was coming to the UK. The judge then heard from the
      appellant's aunt, a British citizen who had left the DRC  in  November
      2000 and claimed asylum in the UK and had naturalised in 2008. She was
      the sister of the appellant's mother. She claimed to have  received  a
      call in September 2013 asking her  to  meet  a  stranger  at  Victoria
      station and discovered that the stranger was with the  appellant.  She
      denied that there had been a planned migration for the appellant.  She
      said that she had returned to the DRC in 2014 and had tried to  locate
      family members but had been unable to do so.

   8. The judge did not accept the claim that the appellant  would  have  no
      family support if she had to return to the DRC. He found there  to  be
      no supporting documentary evidence  suggesting  that  the  appellant's
      aunt had returned to the DRC in 2014 or at any other time. He noted in
      any event that the appellant's aunt had  conceded  that  she  had  not
      sought to make any enquiries with the local police or  authorities  or
      with any of the appellant's siblings' schools and denied knowing  what
      employment her own brother had in the DRC. The judge did not find  her
      to be a truthful witness and he rejected her account of how she had no
      idea of the appellant coming to the UK. The judge found it likely that
      the appellant still had family  members  in  the  DRC,  including  her
      parents, and considered that she  would  not  therefore  be  returning
      without any family support. The judge found that the  appellant  could
      return to her family in the DRC and that she would be able  to  obtain
      further education or find employment there and he considered that  her
      removal to the DRC would be proportionate and  would  not  breach  her
      Article 8 rights. He therefore dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

   9. Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      on the grounds that the judge's reasoning in concluding that  she  had
      family in the DRC was unsustainable. The  judge  had  failed  to  make
      findings on the appellant's  evidence  and  made  irrational  findings
      about her aunt's  evidence.  The  judge  disbelieved  the  appellant's
      aunt's evidence that she had returned to the DRC in 2014, but extracts
      from her passport which were before the judge showed that she  did  in
      fact visit the DRC in 2014 and his disbelief of  that  matter  tainted
      the rest of his credibility findings. The judge also erred by  relying
      on adverse findings made in previous judicial decisions which had been
      set aside. The  judge's  analysis  of  whether  the  appellant  had  a
      protected family life under Article 8 and his rejection of the  matter
      was flawed and inadequately reasoned.

  10. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 28  August  2019.
      The matter then came before me for a hearing,  by  way  of  skype  for
      business.

Hearing and submissions

  11. Mr Collins submitted that the appellant's  evidence  had  consistently
      been that she did not know where her family was  and  had  no  contact
      with them. The judge failed to make any findings  on  the  appellant's
      evidence, which was  a  material  error  as  the  appellant  would  be
      returning to the DRC as a lone, vulnerable woman after being in the UK
      since the age of 13 years and would  be  at  risk  in  line  with  the
      background country evidence. The judge's rejection of the  claim  that
      the appellant's aunt had been back to the DRC in 2014, in the light of
      evidence before him confirming that account, was also a material error
      as it tainted his findings on credibility in general. The  judge  also
      erred by referring to, and relying  upon,  previous  adverse  findings
      made by the First-tier Tribunal when the appellant's first appeal  had
      been heard in her absence at a time when she had in fact withdrawn her
      appeal and the decision in the  second  appeal  had  been  set  aside.
      Finally, the judge erred in his findings on family  life  as  he  gave
      inadequate reasons for rejecting the family life between the appellant
      and her aunt and cousins despite their very close bonds and  the  fact
      that she had lived with them since the age of 13.

  12. Ms Cunha submitted that the judge  could  not  have  ignored  previous
      findings on the appellant's protection claim when that  claim,  albeit
      no  longer  pursued,  was  still  relevant  to  the  matter  of  'very
      significant obstacles to integration'. The judge was entitled to  have
      regard to the adverse credibility findings previously made against the
      appellant in her protection claim,  when  considering  her  Article  8
      claim. Although the judge had made a  clear  error  in  rejecting  the
      appellant's aunt's claim to have travelled to the DRC  in  2014,  that
      was not a material error because the  judge  gave  other  reasons  for
      concluding that the account of that visit was not credible. The  judge
      was entitled to conclude that the appellant's family remained  in  the
      DRC and that she would not, therefore, be returning as a single female
      with  no  support  network.  The   judge's   decision   was   entirely
      sustainable.

  13. Mr Collins reiterated the submissions previously made in response.

Discussion and conclusions

  14. The judge's conclusions on 'very significant obstacles to integration'
      for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) and on Article  8  family  and
      private life outside the immigration rules were very  much  predicated
      upon the rejection of the appellant's account of having  lost  contact
      with her family and having no knowledge  of  the  whereabouts  of  any
      family remaining in the DRC. It is the appellant's case that the error
      made by the judge in rejecting the claim that her aunt returned to the
      DRC in 2014 was a material one, as it tainted the judge's  credibility
      assessment and undermined all his adverse findings in regard  to  that
      matter, such that he was wrong to reject  her  account  of  having  no
      family in the DRC.

  15. It is not in dispute that there was an error in the judge's finding at
      [44] that there  was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant's  aunt  having
      returned to the DRC in 2014. The  appellant's  bundle,  at  page  A13,
      contained a copy of her  aunt's  passport  showing  a  stamp  for  her
      journey to the DRC in 2014. However, I am entirely in  agreement  with
      Ms Cunha that the error was not a material one,  because  it  was  the
      nature of, and reasons for, the trip that were of relevance, and  that
      was only one of the reasons why the judge disbelieved the  account  of
      the trip. The evidence of both the appellant and her  aunt,  in  their
      statements and before the judge, was that the purpose of the  trip  in
      2014 was to try and find out news about her parents and siblings,  yet
      the evidence before the judge was that the appellant's  aunt  had  not
      had time to visit the family property, that she had not sought to make
      any enquiries with the local police or other authorities, that she had
      made no enquiries with the appellant's siblings' schools and that  she
      was unable to  contact  her  brother's  employers  to  ask  about  his
      whereabouts as she did not know what his employment was. At  [50]  the
      judge found that even if the appellant's aunt had visited the  DRC  in
      2014, it could only  have  been  for  some  other  purpose  than  that
      claimed, given her failure  to  make  any  enquiries  or  checks  from
      obvious sources, and he did not accept her account of having  gone  to
      the DRC to find the appellant's family members. It seems  to  me  that
      the judge was perfectly entitled to reach such an  adverse  conclusion
      and to reject the appellant's claim on that basis alone and I  do  not
      accept the suggestion that such a conclusion  was  undermined  by  the
      judge's error as to whether the journey to the DRC had actually  taken
      place.

  16. There were, in any event, further  reasons  given  by  the  judge  for
      finding the evidence to lack credibility. Those included the  findings
      made at [45], on the account of how the appellant came to be with  her
      aunt in the UK, which the judge was fully  and  properly  entitled  to
      reject for the reasons given. The judge also took account of the  fact
      that the appellant's protection claim, albeit not pursued before  him,
      had been rejected as being based upon inconsistent evidence  which  in
      turn reflected adversely on her credibility.

  17. The judge's findings in that regard in fact formed the  basis  of  the
      fourth ground of appeal argued before me, which contended that he  had
      erred in law by being influenced by adverse findings made in  previous
      judicial decisions which had been set aside. However, that was not the
      case with the decision in the appeal in  2015.  Whether  or  not  that
      appeal proceeded in the appellant's absence and despite the  appellant
      having sought to withdraw it, there were unchallenged adverse findings
      made by the respondent with reference to  various  inconsistencies  in
      the appellant's claim which both the previous and current judges  were
      entitled to consider. Likewise, the appellant's decision not to pursue
      the appeal before Judge Greasley on  protection  grounds,  albeit  for
      reasons relating to the change in the country situation,  nevertheless
      left  unchallenged  the  adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  the
      respondent.

  18. That also leads on to Mr Collins' first ground of appeal,  namely  the
      judge's failure to make findings on the appellant's own  evidence.  It
      is clear from the above and from his findings at [43] that  the  judge
      did consider the appellant's evidence, to the extent that he took note
      of adverse findings made previously on  her  protection  claim,  which
      claim included her account of her family members in the  DRC.  In  any
      event, I reject the suggestion that  the  judge  reached  his  adverse
      conclusions about the existence of family members remaining in the DRC
      on the basis of the appellant's aunt's evidence alone  without  taking
      account of the appellant's evidence. It is manifestly clear  that  the
      judge was addressing the evidence of both the appellant and  her  aunt
      when concluding that the entire story had been  fabricated,  with  the
      account of the absence of family in the DRC having been  presented  to
      provide a basis for claiming that the  appellant,  as  a  lone  female
      without support, could not return to the DRC.

  19. As for the grounds challenging the findings  on  family  life,  it  is
      clear that the judge had regard to all relevant matters and took  full
      account of the appellant's relationship with her aunt and cousins. The
      judge's findings in that regard were clearly and  properly  influenced
      by his previous  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  immediate  family
      members remained living in the DRC, that she had retained contact with
      them and that they could support her on her return  there.  The  judge
      was accordingly fully and properly entitled to conclude as he did.

  20. For all of these reasons I find that the grounds disclose no errors of
      law in the judge's decision. The judge's decision is  a  detailed  and
      comprehensive  one  taking  into  account  all  of  the  evidence  and
      providing cogent reasons for the conclusions reached on all grounds.

DECISION

  21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.



Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  16 March 2021
