
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12374/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2019                |On 16 August 2019               |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                               Mrs SAKINA [B]
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel
      (instructed by Dean Manson LLP Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Macdonald on 28 May 2019 against the decision to dismiss  the
         Appellant's protection appeal made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Geraint Jones QC in a decision and reasons promulgated on 24  April
         2019.

      2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 21  January  1950.
         She is a widow and has two daughters living in the United  Kingdom.
         The Appellant made visits to the United Kingdom in 2006  and  2016,
         returning to her home in Pakistan afterwards.  She  claimed  asylum
         during a further visit to the United Kingdom in 2018.  She  alleged
         that she was at risk from religious fanatics  because  one  of  her
         daughters had married an Ahmadi.  Her protection claim was  refused
         by the Respondent on 11 October 2018.

    3.     Judge Jones QC found that the Appellant's fear of return was not
         objectively well founded, for a number of reasons: see [31] onwards
         of his determination where those reasons are set out in detail  and
         which need  not  be  repeated  here.   The  judge  found  that  the
         Appellant had not shown that she had  been  targeted  by  non-state
         agents, and that parts of her claim had been fabricated.  Thus  the
         appeal was dismissed.

    4.     Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  Judge  Macdonald
         because it was considered arguable that the  judge  had  not  taken
         into account material evidence.  It  would,  however,  be  for  the
         Appellant to show that the evidence in question had  in  fact  been
         placed before the judge and had been translated.  The  evidence  in
         question were translations into English  of  untranslated  WhatsApp
         texts which were at pages 24  and  25  of  the  Appellant's  appeal
         bundle.

    5.     Ms Jones for the Respondent indicated that  the  onwards  appeal
         was opposed, although no rule 24 notice had been filed.

    6.     Designated Judge Macdonald had  indicated  a  need  for  further
         supporting evidence when granting permission  to  appeal.   At  the
         start of the hearing I made available to both parties the  tribunal
         file, containing  the  Appellant's  Notice  of  Appeal,  the  trial
         bundles and the manuscript record  of  proceedings  kept  by  Judge
         Jones QC.  These were examined  by  the  advocates  and  copies  of
         documents were provided.  Ms Jones provided  a  copy  of  the  Home
         Office Presenting Officer's notes of the hearing.  Mr Lee  informed
         the tribunal that no notes of the hearing were available  from  the
         Appellant's solicitor who had  conducted  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing.  The solicitor would, however, be called as a witness  and
         had made a witness statement dated 6 August 2019.

    7.     Following a careful examination of the First-tier Tribunal file,
         it was agreed that  the  translations  were  not  included  in  the
         Appellant's bundle.  The  WhatsApp  texts  were  mentioned  in  the
         Appellant's Notice of Appeal but had  not  been  exhibited  to  the
         Notice of Appeal.

    8.     Mr Lee for the Appellant relied on the grounds submitted and the
         grant of permission to appeal.  The Appellant's case was  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge had not considered all  of  the  material
         evidence which was an obvious error of law.

    9.     Mr Muzaffar Mansoor, solicitor, ("Mr  Mansoor")  gave  evidence.
         He confirmed the truth of his  witness  statement  dated  6  August
         2018, which stood as his evidence in chief.  There  in  summary  he
         stated that he had presented the appeal before Judge Jones QC.   Mr
         Mansoor said he had not liked the judge's approach.  He  stated  at
         paragraph 3: "During the hearing  I  did  refer  to  the  FTTJ  the
         evidence at pages G1, H1, H2 including letter and WhatsApp messages
         at pages 21 and 21A of the  grounds  of  appeal  in  support  of  a
         reference in the grounds of appeal." (sic)

    10.    In supplementary questions Mr Mansoor  said  that  the  WhatsApp
         documents had been mentioned in the grounds of  appeal.   They  had
         been translated for the court by the court  interpreter.   He  then
         said that he thought the page of  translation  (marked  "21A")  had
         been handed to the judge with other loose documents at the stage of
         closing submissions.

    11.    Asked to confirm that the court interpreter had  translated  the
         documents, Mr Mansoor said that the judge had intervened and  asked
         what the  documents  were.   Mr  Mansoor  could  not  say  why  the
         documents were not in the appeal bundle.  Nor could he explain  why
         they had not been attached to the grounds.  He was however  certain
         that the court interpreter had translated them.

    12.     Cross-examined,  Mr  Mansoor  was  asked  why  if  he  had  the
         translation of the WhatsApp messages with him, there had  been  any
         need to involve the court interpreter? Mr Mansoor replied that  the
         documents were not in English.  He became agitated and accused  the
         Home Office Presenting Officer  of  making  a  serious  allegation.
         Pressed to answer, he replied that he did not know.  He  reiterated
         that he had tendered the document  in  submissions.   He  was  then
         asked whether  he  usually  tendered  documents  at  the  stage  of
         submissions, rather than at the start of the hearing.  He  said  he
         thought he might have forgotten.

    13.    Re-examined, Mr Mansoor said that he had first appreciated  that
         there was no translation when the judge pointed  it  out.   He  had
         given it from his loose sheets.  He believed that  the  translation
         had been before the tribunal.

    14.    Mr Lee submitted that  if  his  principal  submission  that  the
         translation  had  been  before  the  tribunal  and  had  not   been
         considered were not accepted, he further  submitted  that  all  the
         evidence had not  been  taken  into  account.   There  had  been  a
         handwritten letter before the judge describing  threats  which  was
         material evidence which had not been considered  and  on  which  no
         proper finding had been made.  That was a material  error  of  law.
         The determination should be set aside and the appeal reheard before
         another judge.

    15.    Ms Jones submitted that the Appellant had failed to  prove  that
         the translation had been before the  judge  at  any  stage  of  the
         hearing.   The judge had addressed every point in  the  Appellant's
         story and had dealt with the claimed threats at [39  (ix)]  of  the
         determination.  It had been  claimed  that  the  threats  were  all
         linked.  The translations now seen bore no weight in any  event  as
         they were dated the day before the handwritten letter, and in  some
         instances later than that.  The letter bore no weight.   There  was
         no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's determination
         and the judge's findings were sustainable.  The  appeal  should  be
         dismissed.

    16.    In reply Mr Lee drew attention to the judge's use  of  the  term
         "self-serving", which had been deprecated by the Court of Appeal as
         a term of evidential analysis.  While points could perhaps be taken
         against some of the Appellant's documents, there remained  evidence
         of threats which the judge had failed to deal with.

    17.    The grant of permission to appeal by Designated Judge  Macdonald
         was in effect conditional on the production of satisfactory further
         evidence.  That condition was not fulfilled.  I find as a fact that
         no translation of the Urdu WhatsApp messages was ever  produced  to
         Judge Jones QC.  The First-tier Tribunal file was closely  examined
         at the start of the error of law hearing and there was no trace  of
         the so called "loose" documents claimed by Mr Mansoor.   There  was
         no mention of any translation being  undertaken  in  court  in  the
         judge's determination, which provided a  detailed  summary  of  the
         evidence and the course of the hearing, nor in the  judge's  record
         of proceedings nor in the Home Office  Presenting  Officer's  note.
         Mr Mansoor accepted that he made no note at  all  of  the  hearing.
         There is no mention of the WhatsApp messages or of any  translation
         of them in his skeleton argument nor in  the  judge's  note  of  Mr
         Mansoor's submissions.

    18.    I find that Judge Jones QC's determination provides a  full  and
         accurate record of the  evidence  given  at  the  hearing.   It  is
         correct that no alleged screen shot was  referred  to  him  in  the
         course of the evidence: see [31(viii)] of  the  determination.   No
         translation was produced to him.  In fact pages 25 and  26  of  the
         Appellant's appeal bundle contain  untranslated  Urdu  texts  dated
         "Sat 7 Apr" which are WhatsApp screenshots, but the fact  that  the
         judge did not know what they were is of no  significance,  as  they
         were incomprehensible without a  certified  translation,  and  were
         less than clear in any event.   No context for  them  was  provided
         and they are a clear example of selective disclosure.

    19.    The alternative submission valiantly made by Mr Lee cannot carry
         the day.  Judge Jones QC carefully considered all of  the  evidence
         of alleged threats and made specific reference to  the  Appellant's
         appeal  bundles  which  he  plainly  examined.   He  addressed  the
         evidence of alleged threats from religious fanatics at  [38  (vii)]
         of the determination and reached conclusions  which  were  open  to
         him.

    20.    The judge considered the evidence meticulously.   Nothing  turns
         on his use of the term "self serving" as he gave  reasons  for  all
         his findings.  His findings  might  even  be  considered  generous,
         accepting as he did the burglary  in  2012  or  2013,  and  a  road
         traffic incident in 2013, although he gave proper reasons  for  not
         accepting  the  Appellant's  claims  that  they  were  examples  of
         persecutory activity against her by non-state  agents.   The  judge
         was entitled to draw proper inferences from  his  primary  findings
         and to ask why  this  feeble  protection  claim  should  have  been
         advanced when it was.  His conclusion that there was a family  link
         which was why the claim had been invented was open to him.

    21.    As the judge correctly identified, the  Appellant's  credibility
         was central to the appeal.  The  country  background  evidence  for
         Pakistan  was  not  in  serious  dispute.  The  Appellant's  asylum
         application had many if not most of the hallmarks  of  a  contrived
         claim: late claim not made at the first opportunity, lack of detail
         and general vagueness, serious inconsistency, excessive coincidence
         and selected, doubtful documents produced with no context.

    22.    In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal Judge reached careful and
         sustainable  findings,  in  the  course  of  a  thorough,  balanced
         determination, which securely resolved the issues and  applied  the
         correct lower standard of proof. I find that there was no  material
         error of law and the onwards appeal must be dismissed.







    DECISION

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




    Signed                        Dated 15 August 2019


    [pic][pic]


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




