
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12434/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 February 2019                  |On 03rd April 2019                   |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                            YASSIN ARAFAT BHUIYAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Ferguson of Counsel instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Eban, promulgated on 5 December 2018, dismissing the appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 12 October 2018 refusing protection in
    the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 21 October  1986.   He
    first entered the United Kingdom in September 2009 with leave to  enter
    as a Tier 4 Student.  He made  subsequent  applications  for  leave  to
    remain in this capacity which were successful, but then a decision  was
    taken to curtail his leave with effect  from  26  January  2015.   This
    history is summarised at paragraph 2 of the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Paragraph 2 continues the chronology in the following terms:



         "The appellant applied for further leave which was  refused  on  23
         March 2015.  On 6 May 2015  the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
         remain on human rights grounds which was rejected as invalid on  14
         July 2015.  On 23 July 2015 he submitted  a  further  human  rights
         application which was refused with an in-country right  of  appeal.
         The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard on  21  March  2017
         when it was dismissed by a decision promulgated on 31 March 2017 in
         appeal  HU/05188/2016  ("the  First  Decision").    The   appellant
         appealed the First Decision unsuccessfully.  On  21  May  2018  the
         appellant claimed asylum."



3.   The appeal in HU/05188/2016 was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Povey, and was dismissed for the reasons set out in his  decision.   In
    the  instant  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eban  has  helpfully
    summarised the findings of Judge Povey (paragraph 6).


4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's rehearsal of the chronology  omits  one
    further application made by the Appellant.  After his previous appeal -
    against the 'First Decision' - the Appellant made a further application
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The application was  made
    on 29 December 2017 and refused with no right of  appeal  on  21  April
    2018.


5.   The decision letter of 21 April 2018 was included in  the  Respondent's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal (Annex  E76-E80).   It  is  clear
    from the decision letter that the Appellant essentially sought to rerun
    the  same  case  that  had  been  the  subject  of  the   decision   in
    HU/05188/2016 - that it would be in  breach  of  his  human  rights  to
    remove him to Bangladesh because he had been diagnosed with  ankylosing
    spondylitis. It is  also  clear  from  the  decision  letter  that  the
    Respondent, having considered the application, determined that  nothing
    new significantly different had been  raised  in  that  application  to
    amount to a 'fresh claim' pursuant to paragraph 353 of the  Immigration
    Rules.  Accordingly, not only was the application rejected but  it  was
    rejected on the basis that there was no fresh claim and accordingly  no
    right of appeal.


6.   It is in those circumstances that one month later  the  Appellant  came
    to make his application for asylum on 21 May 2018.


7.   It became readily  apparent  in  the  screening  interview  -  and  was
    essentially confirmed during  the  substantive  interview  -  that  the
    Appellant in truth had no asylum or protection  claim  to  advance;  he
    was, yet again, relying entirely upon his medical  condition.   In  the
    screening interview record it is noted that  when  invited  to  explain
    briefly all of the reasons he  could  not  return  to  Bangladesh,  the
    Appellant responded: "I cannot get treatment to the same  standard  for
    my spondylitis in [Bangladesh]. I might be in  a  wheelchair  there  or
    will die if I don't have the treatment. No other reasons" (Respondent's
    bundle at B5).  See similarly the substantive interview, for example at
    questions 10 and 11 (C15).


8.   In this context it seems to me that it should not  go  without  comment
    that in evaluating the materials before the First-tier Tribunal in  the
    current proceedings Judge Eban adopted the findings of Judge Povey  and
    only made the following additional findings:

         "1.  Those with disabling conditions in Bangladesh can be subjected
             to discrimination.  This is based on what the respondent  says
             in the reasons for refusal letter and the two reports referred
             to.


         2.    The  appellant  is  in  close  contact  with  his  family  in
             Bangladesh.  This is accepted.


         3.   There is no evidence that  the  appellant  has  a  partner  or
             children in the UK." (paragraph 14)


    It may readily be seen that none of these  additional  matters  relates
    specifically to  the  nature  or  extent  of  the  Appellant's  medical
    condition;  further  save  for  the  reference  to  discrimination   in
    Bangladesh,  none  of  them  relates  specifically  to  the  nature  or
    circumstances that the Appellant might confront upon his return.  It is
    difficult in such circumstances to see - yet again - that the Appellant
    was advancing anything new or different  about  his  circumstances.  It
    would appear that the only reason he had secured himself an  appealable
    decision was because he had presented himself to the Respondent  as  an
    asylum seeker, rather than - as he actually was - a person applying for
    consideration  of  a  human  rights  claim   based   on   his   medical
    circumstances for a third time.  I return to this  at  the  end  of  my
    decision.


9.   Be that as it may, the Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application
    for protection for reasons set out in a 'reasons  for  refusal'  letter
    ('RFRL') dated 12 October 2018.


10.  The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


11.  Before the First-tier Tribunal the scope of the  Appellant's  challenge
    to the Respondent's decision was made clear:

         "At the outset of  the  hearing  Ms  Ferguson  confirmed  that  the
         appellant was not proceeding with his protection claim  for  asylum
         or under article 3, that he was not proceeding with  an  article  3
         claim on medical grounds but that he was seeking  to  rely  on  his
         medical condition under article 8." (paragraph 3).


12.  I emphasise that  it  may  be  seen  that  it  was  the  Judge's  clear
    understanding,  having  confirmed  the  matter  with  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant, that the Appellant was only relying upon Article  8  in  his
    appeal and doing so by reference to his medical condition. Indeed there
    was no specific evidence filed or relied upon  in  respect  of  private
    life  by  reference  to  such  matters   as   personal   relationships,
    friendships, and  so  on.   This  was  a  case  that  rested  upon  the
    Appellant's medical condition and was  advanced  under  the  ground  of
    Article 8; Article 3 was expressly not pursued.




13.  There is no suggestion in the grounds of appeal  filed  in  support  of
    the application for permission to appeal that Judge Eban  misunderstood
    the position of the Appellant.  There  is  no  attempt  to  impugn  the
    Judge's understanding of the Appellant's case as expressed at paragraph
    3 of his Decision.


14.  Indeed, when the materials in the appeal are considered in  the  round,
    it may readily be appreciated that there was nothing in  the  materials
    that would support a case under Article 3 pursuant to the understanding
    of Article 3 in medical cases explored in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ
    64 (including the development of the scope of Article 3 pursuant to the
    consideration of Paposhvili).  As such it was entirely appropriate  and
    realistic for the Appellant to have  indicated,  through  Counsel,  his
    reliance on Article 8 only, and that he was not relying on Article 3.


15.  The First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision promulgated on 5 December 2018.


16.  The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 2 January 2019.


17.  The grounds of appeal submitted  in  support  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal raise two distinct areas of challenge:  "Ground-1:
    FTT has failed to give adequate reasons why A's circumstances  are  not
    exceptional", developed at  paragraphs  5-8;  and  "Ground-2:  Wrongful
    assessment of financial independency", developed at paragraph 9. Ground
    1 is pleaded with reference to AM (Zimbabwe). Ground 2 pleads that  the
    Judge had erred in  law  in  suggesting  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    financially independent.


18.  The grant of permission to appeal in material part is in these terms:

         "2.  It is argued that the Tribunal erred in its  approach  to  the
             medical issues in the case (Articles 3 and 8) in


               a. Failing to give adequate reasons as to why the Appellant's
                  circumstances  are  not  exceptional  in  line  with   the
                  guidance given in the case of AM (Zimbabwe) and Anor.  -v-
                  SSHD 2018 EWCA Civ 64.  Although the Appellant's condition
                  is not life  threatening,  given  the  evidence  that  his
                  current treatment is not available to  him  in  Bangladesh
                  this ground is arguable.  The Tribunal may have  erred  in
                  interpreting the  issue  of  undue  harshness  as  one  of
                  integration only


               b. Finding that the Appellant is not financially  independent
                  when the evidence was that his family and friends  support
                  him.  This ground is not arguable.  The  Appellant  relies
                  heavily on the NHS for medical treatment for which  he  is
                  not in a position to pay thereby placing a burden  on  the
                  public purse.

         3.   Ground 1 is arguable.  Ground 2 is not arguable  There  is  an
             arguable material error of law."


19.  Notwithstanding the terms of the grant of permission to appeal,  in  my
    judgment the first difficulty that the Appellant encounters in pursuing
    his challenge before the Upper Tribunal is that he did  not  rely  upon
    Article 3 before the First-tier Tribunal.


20.  The reference to 'very exceptional circumstances' in AM  (Zimbabwe)  is
    in the context of a consideration of Article 3: see  AM  (Zimbabwe)  at
    paragraphs 18 and 19.  To that extent  the  grounds  of  appeal  -  and
    indeed the basis of the grant of permission  to  appeal  -  rely  on  a
    submission that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed properly to  apply
    Article 3 jurisprudence.  In my judgement in  circumstances  where  the
    Appellant was not relying upon  Article  3  this  ground  of  challenge
    cannot possibly succeed.


21.  This was the only basis of the grant of permission to appeal:  although
    passing reference was made to Article 8  in  the  opening  sentence  of
    paragraph 2 of the  permission  decision,  paragraph  2a  is  based  on
    Article 3 ; at paragraph 2b permission to appeal  was  not  granted  in
    respect of ground 2. That is sufficient to dispose of the challenge.


22.   Nonetheless,  for  completeness  I  explored  a  possible  Article   8
    challenge with Ms Ferguson - particularly  given  that  the  criticisms
    raised at paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 in respect of the approach  to  medical
    evidence could inform a consideration under either or  both  Article  3
    and Article 8.


23.  Paragraphs 6-8 of the grounds of appeal are in the following terms:

         "6.  It is accepted that A's health is currently  stable  but  this
             stability depends on the continuous monitoring of  A's  health
             and combination of drugs.  The  letter  from  Apollo  Hospital
             confirms the unavailability of  the  treatment  and  drugs  in
             Bangladesh.  A confirms in his evidence  that  the  prescribed
             drugs and treatment are not available in Bangladesh.


         7.   The FTTJ has therefore erred  in  law  in  not  giving  enough
             weight to the medial evidence.  FTTJ's conclusion at  [17]  is
             therefore flawed because  according  to  medical  evidence,  A
             would need support on his return to Bangladesh if he is out of
             treatment.


         8.   FTTJ further erred in law at  [19]  applying  the  wrong  test
             under  immigration   rules   paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi).    The
             significant difficulties needed to be assessed on the  medical
             grounds, not on integration issue."


24.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge started his consideration  of  Article  8
    by observing that although this was a human rights based challenge,  it
    had to be "viewed through the lens of the Immigration Rules" (paragraph
    15).  The Judge then considered the wording of  paragraph  276ADE,  and
    insofar as  276ADE(1)(vi)  contained  reference  to  "very  significant
    obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which  he
    would have to go if required to  leave  the  UK"  directed  himself  to
    observations in AK (Sierra Leone) [2016] EWCA Civ  813  in  respect  of
    integration, and to observations in  Treebowan  &  others  [2017]  UKUT
    00013 (IAC) in respect of very significant obstacles.


25.  Further to this, the key passages of the Decision are then set  out  in
    these terms:

         "16. The appellant was born in Bangladesh and lived there until  he
             was almost 23 when he came to the UK to study.  He speaks  the
             language of his country and was educated there.  He  has  been
             in the UK for nine years.  He is now 32.  He remains close  to
             his parents and family in Bangladesh.   He  told  me  he  last
             spoke to them on the morning of the hearing.  I find  that  if
             he returns he will be able to live at home with his family who
             will support him emotionally and practically,  they  will  not
             cast him out because of his condition.


         17.  There is no evidence that the appellant at present is not able
             to live independently or requires any walking or other aids or
             assistance  to  participate  fully  and  equally  in   social,
             economic or cultural activities.  While it  is  apparent  that
             ankylosing spondylitis is a chronic or lifelong disease  there
             is  no  medical  evidence  whatsoever  with  respect  to   the
             appellant's prognosis whether or not he has  treatment;  there
             is no evidence of the likelihood  of  the  condition  becoming
             debilitating and leading  to  disability  in  the  appellant's
             case.  The background evidence at RB suggests that  70-90%  of
             people with AS remain fully independent or minimally  disabled
             in the long term.   However,  some  people  eventually  become
             severely disabled as a result of  the  bones  in  their  spine
             fusing in a fixed position and damage to other joints such  as
             the hips or knees.


         18.  The independent evidence before me  with  regard  to  societal
             attitudes  in  Bangladesh  towards  those  with   disabilities
             indicates some  prejudice  and  ignorance.   Because  of  this
             accessibility in public transportation, public  buildings  and
             the built environment  is  not  as  it  is  here  in  the  UK.
             Nevertheless were this appellant to  return  to  Bangladesh  I
             find, on the basis of the background evidence, that  there  is
             no reason to suppose he will be marginalised  because  of  his
             medical condition.  I find that he will be able to get out and
             about and operate independently day-to-day, as he does now  in
             the UK, and he will be able to build up relationships with old
             friends and acquaintances and make new  ones.   On  the  basis
             that 70-90% of people with  AS  remain  fully  independent  or
             minimally disabled in the long term it is more likely than not
             that he may never lose his independence, as he fears."




26.  In consequence of this analysis the Judge went on to conclude  that  on
    balance he found that "the appellant would not  have  very  significant
    obstacles to  integration"  (paragraph  19)  and  accordingly  did  not
    satisfy   the   Immigration   Rules   with   reference   to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  Thereafter the Judge went  on  to  consider  Article  8
    beyond the scope of the Immigration Rules: see paragraphs  20  and  21.
    It is clear in particular at paragraph 21 that the Judge had regard  to
    the  public  interest  and  the  applicable  jurisprudence.   In  part,
    paragraph 21 is in the following terms:


         "21. In coming to the  proportionate  balancing  exercise,  I  have
             taken account of the fact that the Immigration Rules were  not
             met.  While the appellant speaks  some  English  after  having
             studied  here  for  a  few  years,  he  is   not   financially
             independent and cannot pay for his medical treatment,  he  has
             not had leave since January 2015 -  before  his  diagnosis  of
             ankylosing spondylitis - and in any event his leave has always
             been precarious which means that little weight should be given
             to the private life he has established.  I find that there  is
             not sufficient evidence to indicate that  the  appellant  will
             not be able to build up a private life in Bangladesh, even  if
             he does not have access to Cimzia [the medication that he  was
             receiving through the NHS]."




27.   The  Judge  went  on  to  conclude  "that  there  are  no  exceptional
    circumstances which would render a  refusal  of  breach  of  Article  8
    because it would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    appellant",  and  that  the  Appellant's  Article  8  claim  was   "not
    sufficiently strong to outweigh the public interest in maintaining  the
    economic wellbeing of the country by means of effective and  consistent
    immigration  control."   The  Judge  concluded  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was proportionate.


28.  It is clear  from  the  Decision  that  in  embarking  upon  the  above
    analysis, the Judge in the premises had careful regard to the  evidence
    in the appeal. At  paragraphs  10-13  he  set  out  extracts  from  the
    supporting documentary evidence. Further, as  noted  above,  the  Judge
    made clear findings of fact - adopting those of Judge Povey to which he
    added his own findings.


29.  However, it is to be  acknowledged  that  the  Judge  was  mistaken  in
    stating that the most recent medical evidence was  a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's GP dated 17 January 2018 (paragraph 10).  Included  in  the
    Respondent's bundle was a more recent letter  dated  7  September  2018
    from a consultant rheumatologist at the Department of  Rheumatology  at
    Barts Arthritis Centre in the Mile End Hospital (Respondent's bundle at
    D79).


30.  The consultant's letter of 7 September 2018 is brief. In  my  judgement
    it neither adds nor detracts from those matters referred to in the GP's
    letter of 17 January 2018.  I quote its content in its entirety:

         "Diagnosis


         1.   Ankylosing spondylitis.


         Current medication


          1. Cimzia 200mg fortnightly.


         Yaesin is managing well.  He finds that  his  symptom  is  becoming
         slightly worse in the cold weather but otherwise there has been  no
         new concern.
         His monitoring blood tests have been satisfactory.
         I will see him again in another 9 months or so."


31.  The best that might be said about this letter by  way  of  support  for
    the Appellant's case is that it shows that  the  Appellant's  condition
    whilst being treated in the UK is satisfactory - which  necessarily  is
    the starting point for his expressed concerns about what  might  happen
    without such treatment. However, this is not materially different  from
    the substance of the materials to which the Judge did have regard.  Nor
    did the Judge 'overlook' the possible impact if  treatment  in  the  UK
    stopped: indeed this was at the core of the Appellant's case.


32.  In all such circumstances  I  find  the  mistake  at  paragraph  10  in
    failing to identify or otherwise refer  to  the  most  recent  item  of
    medical evidence was not material in the overall consideration  of  the
    case.


33.  That said, I would briefly observe that it seems surprising that  there
    was  such  limited  evidence  from  the  Appellant's  consultant.   The
    Appellant's consultant was, after all, the specialist  supervising  the
    Appellant's treatment. Instead the Appellant relied  more  particularly
    on evidence from his GP.  Indeed, even in filing further documents with
    the Upper Tribunal (in anticipation of consideration in the event  that
    an error of law were to be found), the Appellant has  included  nothing
    further from any specialists.


34.  Further to the above, the Appellant otherwise  in  substance  seeks  to
    impugn the Judge's evaluation of  the  evidence  -  with  reference  in
    particular to the findings at paragraphs 16-18.


35.  In the premises it is to be  noted  that  the  Judge  in  adopting  the
    findings of Judge Povey acknowledged:

         "Ankylosing spondylitis is a progressive disease for which there is
         no cure, rather treatment is aimed at  managing  the  symptoms  and
         slowing rather than stopping further deterioration" (finding  6  at
         paragraph 6).




36.  Paragraph 6 of the  grounds  of  appeal  accept  that  the  Appellant's
    health is currently stable, asserts  that  such  stability  depends  on
    continuous monitoring and drugs, and refers  to  the  evidence  from  a
    hospital in Bangladesh as to the unavailability treatment and drugs  in
    Bangladesh. In itself this paragraph does not express any criticism  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge. In any event, it seems to me it is clear
    that in his analysis at paragraphs 17 and 18 the Judge proceeded on the
    premise that the Appellant would not be able to continue the  treatment
    that he has been having in the  United  Kingdom.   However,  the  Judge
    found that there was no evidence to indicate that the risk  of  serious
    deterioration in his underlying medical condition was any  greater  for
    the Appellant than that for the general population of AS sufferers.


37.  The pleading at paragraph 7 of the grounds that the Judge did not  give
    "enough weight to the medical evidence" is in substance  an  expression
    of a disagreement with the Judge's conclusion and does not  identify  a
    specific error of law.


38.  Equally it seems to me that  it  cannot  be  said  that  he  Judge  has
    disregarded the Appellant's medical circumstances when considering  the
    issue  of  integration  pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Necessarily, the Appellant's case under  the  Rules
    was that there was an obstacle to integration by reason of his  medical
    condition.  The Judge made findings open to him on  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant had not established that that was the case.  I can see no
    substance for criticism  of  the  Judge's  analysis.  Moreover,  in  my
    judgement it is  adequately  clear  that  there  are  no  obstacles  to
    integration.   I  acknowledge  that  there  is  a  chance  -   possibly
    increasing  over  time  -  that  the  Appellant's  underlying   medical
    condition will result in him living a circumscribed life - as indeed it
    might also do if he remains in the United Kingdom.  However, he will be
    returning to his family in Bangladesh - both of  his  parents  and  his
    siblings; it is a family that he indicated  was  essentially  a  middle
    class family - all of his siblings were  still  in  education  and  his
    father works in a responsible role in the healthcare  sector.  He  also
    continues  to  have  friends  in  Bangladesh,  and  indeed  provided  a
    supporting letter from  one  such  friend  living  in  the  Appellant's
    country of origin and nationality.


39.  Ultimately, there was no  real  substance  to  the  Appellant's  appeal
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Just  as  ultimately  there  was  no
    substance to it when it was before Judge Povey.


40.  More particularly, for the reasons given I find no error of law in  the
    decision of Judge Eban. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stand
    accordingly.


41.  Before leaving the decision I feel that it is appropriate to make  some
    further observations. I do so parenthetically and with the caveat  that
    such matters have not been the subject  of  submissions  -  having  not
    formally been before the Tribunal.


42.  I have noted  above  the  somewhat  'irregular'  route  by  which  this
    protection appeal essentially became a vehicle  for  the  Appellant  to
    repeat a twice-refused human rights  claim.   Seemingly  no  point  was
    taken by the Respondent in the  RFRL  in  this  regard,  and  no  point
    appears to have been articulated before the First-tier Tribunal.


43.  The Appellant has filed further materials  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    upon which he would have sought to rely in the event that the  Tribunal
    concluded that there was an error of law.  To that extent there  is  at
    least some indication of an intent or preparedness to run the substance
    of his case for a fourth time.


44.  I have not heard argument on those materials. Nonetheless it  seems  to
    me appropriate to note that on initial perusal  they  appear  in  large
    part to be a repeat of the materials that have already been considered.
     For example, the personal statement of the Appellant's father dated 17
    February 2019 appears to be a duplicate  of  the  statement  previously
    made by the Appellant's father dated 22 January 2018,  but  merely  re-
    dated.  Similarly, there  is  a  letter  from  the  civil  surgeon  for
    Brahmanbaria dated 18 February 2019 which is in identical terms to  the
    letter from the civil surgeon of Brahmanbaria dated  25  January  2018;
    the only discernible difference is  that  the  identity  of  the  civil
    surgeon has changed - the substance of the letter has  not  altered  at
    all.  The Appellant has  otherwise  produced  two  appointment  letters
    which add nothing to his case, and a printout of his GP  records  which
    does not obviously add anything different to  the  various  GP  letters
    that were previously before the First-tier Tribunal. There  is  nothing
    further from the Appellant's consultant.


45.  There is one letter that is different: a letter from the Department  of
    Rheumatology at the Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University.   This
    is in similar but slightly  different  terms  to  a  letter  previously
    relied upon by the Appellant from the Apollo Hospital in  Dhaka.   What
    is of note in respect of both of these letters is that they refer to an
    understanding that the Appellant is "is in advance stage of  ankylosing
    spondylitis" and it is said in the Apollo letter that this  appears  to
    have been decided "after discussing the case with the concerned doctors
    we understand that this patient has  an  advanced  case  of  ankylosing
    spondylitis".  However, it is not made remotely clear on what basis the
    writers of either of these letters have reached the conclusion that the
    Appellant is in an advanced stage  of  his  condition.  Such  a  notion
    apparently runs contrary to the consultant rheumatologist's letter of 7
    September 2018 which opined that the Appellant "is managing  well"  and
    apart  from  a  slight  worsening  of  symptoms  in  the  cold  weather
    "otherwise there has been no new concern".  This is in the  context  of
    the evidence otherwise indicating that the Appellant was not using  any
    aids for walking.


46.  As noted above I did not hear argument on these matters. It is not  for
    me to make any findings of fact. Nonetheless it seems to me appropriate
    to identify any problematic issues in this regard lest the case go  any
    further.


47.  It also seems to me appropriate to  raise  such  observations  for  the
    consideration of  both  parties  in  circumstances  where  the  instant
    application for protection has every appearance of having been  abusive
    (in the sense that there was no substance to any such  application  and
    it appears to have been essentially a device to rerun  a  case  already
    lost twice), and the filing of further evidence  herein  hints  at  the
    possible contemplation of  a  yet  further  application  for  leave  to
    remain,  or  otherwise  the  making  of  further  submissions  to   the
    Respondent. It seems to me that a considerable degree of circumspection
    should be exercised by the  Appellant  -  and  any  advisors  -  before
    advancing a yet further  claim  on  essentially  the  same  or  similar
    grounds, and equally that any such application can be  expected  to  be
    met with a degree of circumspection  on  the  part  of  the  Respondent
    before it might be considered to amount to a fresh claim.


48.  The context cannot be ignored. Pending consideration of his  protection
    claim and appeal the Appellant has  been  able  to  continue  accessing
    healthcare at public expense - indeed a wish to continue to access such
    free healthcare is overtly at the core of his case. There must  come  a
    point where he either brings forward something of adequate substance in
    respect of either Article 3 or Article 8, or it is recognised  that  he
    has no basis to continue his stay - and  his  access  to  free  medical
    treatment - in the United Kingdom.



Notice of Decision

49.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.


50.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed


51.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 30 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
