
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12403/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2018                         |On 20th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                     KS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  her  protection
    claim was dismissed by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11th  June  2018.   That  decision  was  set  aside,  as
    containing a material error of law, in a decision  made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and promulgated on 16th October 2018.  The appeal remained  in
    the Upper Tribunal for the purpose of  remaking  the  decision  as  the
    parties were agreed that there would be no need for full  fact-finding,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  having  found  the  appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness and having accepted her account.

2.   The appeal was listed for hearing on 12th December 2018 and  the  Upper
    Tribunal had before it the appeal bundle prepared in  May  2018  and  a
    further  short  bundle  containing  a  certified  translation  of   the
    appellant's Kyrgyz identity card and a supporting  letter  and  related
    documents.  Mr Eaton relied upon the skeleton argument prepared for the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing and on the written grounds  supporting  the
    application for permission to appeal.

3.   Ms Willocks-Briscoe, for the Secretary of State, drew attention  to  an
    IT failure at the Home Office which impeded her preparation.  Mr  Eaton
    wished to proceed, particularly as the Secretary of State appeared  not
    to have reconsidered the adverse decision, there being a suggestion  at
    the error of law hearing in the Upper Tribunal that such a  step  would
    be taken.  The issues in the appeal were narrow and  largely  concerned
    the question of internal relocation on return  to  Kyrgyzstan  and  the
    sufficiency of protection available.  Before the Upper Tribunal  was  a
    report prepared by a country expert, Mr Robert Chencinor.

4.   The hearing was adjourned to the  afternoon,  to  enable  Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe to prepare.  At 2 p.m.,  she  made  an  application  to  adduce
    evidence in the  form  of  a  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report,
    concerning the position of couples in Kyrgyzstan from different  ethnic
    backgrounds.  Mr Eaton had no objection.

Remaking the Decision

5.   Mr Eaton said that the First-tier Tribunal found the appellant to be  a
    credible witness in relation to her account of  events  in  Kyrgyzstan.
    She is of Uighur ethnic origin and suffered violence at  the  hands  of
    her father, who became a strict Muslim some  twenty  years  beforehand.
    The account the appellant gave of threats from her father was accepted.
     She would be returned to Kyrgyzstan as a lone female  with  a  son  of
    mixed Uighur and Uzbek ethnicity.  Her current partner, in  the  United
    Kingdom, is a Romanian national.

6.   The appellant has been involved  in  some  political  activity  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The salient features of her case were that she  was  a
    victim of violence in the past and there was  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that she  would  face  violence  on  return.   The  critical
    questions concerned the sufficiency of protection available to her  and
    the possibility of relocation internally in Kyrgyzstan, away  from  her
    home area.

7.   Important country evidence contained in the appellant's bundle was  the
    report published in July 2016 by the Minority Rights  Group,  regarding
    the position of women in Kyrgyzstan belonging to minorities and showing
    the attitude of the authorities to domestic violence cases.  They  were
    seen as a domestic problem or an issue for the families concerned.  The
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada published  a  report  in  2015,
    highlighting discrimination  against  Uighurs  in  Kyrgyzstan  and  the
    treatment of returnees.  Uighurs were a small minority in the  country,
    amounting to about 1% of the population and present almost entirely  in
    the southern part of the country, in two urban areas.  They were viewed
    with suspicion by the authorities and faced discrimination.   A  report
    from the Equal Rights Trust published at the end of  2016  showed  that
    the prevalence of domestic violence in Kyrgyzstan is high.  There is an
    absence of effective state protection in such cases.  Domestic violence
    is treated less  seriously  than  other  violence  and  there  are  few
    effective sanctions against perpetrators.

8.   The appellant also relied on the country expert,  Mr  Chencinor,  whose
    report appeared in the bundle at pages  39  to  103.   His  report  was
    prepared in May 2018.  Mr Chencinor stressed  the  small  size  of  the
    Uighur community and the reliance of members of it upon each other  for
    accessing services, work, housing and medical treatment.  Mr  Chencinor
    considered the high levels of domestic violence  in  the  country,  the
    absence  of  crimes  reported  as  honour  killings  as  such  and  the
    likelihood that the appellant's father would follow up the threats made
    against her in the light of the family shame said to  be  felt  as  the
    appellant had given birth to a child  out  of  wedlock.   Mr  Chencinor
    considered it plausible that the threats would be followed  up.   There
    was limited support from other family members and  it  was  not  likely
    that her father would be stopped from carrying out  his  threats.   The
    report also considered why it was that the appellant would  be  clearly
    identified as a Uighur.  Her passport gave her ethnicity  as  such  and
    her registered address was in a predominantly Uighur suburb of Bishkek.
     The appellant speaks Russian and Uighur and although  she  understands
    Kyrgyz, she does not speak the language.   This  would  put  her  at  a
    disadvantage in finding work or education for her  son  because  of  an
    increasingly nationalist language policy.  There is a concentration  of
    Uighurs in East 5 suburb of Bishkek.

9.   Mr Chencinor went on to consider the extent  of  domestic  violence  in
    Kyrgyzstan and in this part of his report, he drew on sources including
    Human Rights Watch and the US State Department.   The  appellant  would
    face difficulties as a lone woman on return, with a child,  in  gaining
    access to housing.  Mr Chencinor also  drew  on  expertise  held  by  a
    senior member of the BBC  Central  Asian  Service,  particularly  about
    attitudes in a strict Muslim family to the breaking off of an  arranged
    marriage in the Uighur minority.

10.  In summary, the accepted account was that the  appellant  had  received
    threats from her father,  that  she  was  from  Bishkek,  that  it  was
    reasonably likely, in the expert's view, that  he  would  find  her  on
    return there and that she could not relocate elsewhere  in  Kyrgyzstan.
    Gaining access to housing and work depended on family and community  in
    the Uighur minority.  She would  not  have  these  sources  of  support
    elsewhere in Kyrgyzstan.  The country evidence showed clearly that  the
    authorities were  unlikely  to  intervene  should  the  appellant  face
    further threats.

11.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe said that the evidence of all  the  witnesses  fell
    to be taken into account.  The supplementary bundle included  a  letter
    from a friend of the appellant which  suggested  that  the  appellant's
    father had washed his hands of her.  That bore on the  plausibility  of
    the threats being carried out  or  repeated.   The  appellant's  friend
    suggested that the  father  no  longer  treats  the  appellant  as  his
    daughter.  Although there may have been threats in the past,  the  more
    recent evidence is that her father wants nothing to do with  her.   The
    appellant's own witness statement suggested that there might be support
    available to her from her friend's mother.  There was nothing  to  show
    that this support would  not  be  available  on  return,  to  help  the
    appellant establish her own network.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe accepted that
    the appeal largely turned on the country evidence before the Tribunal.

12.  The appellant spent eight years with her grandmother in the same  city,
    Bishkek and there was nothing to show  that  she  was  confined  there.
    There was also scant evidence showing that her father had  the  ability
    or inclination to track her down, even though she  ran  away  from  the
    family.  So far as difficulties finding  accommodation  and  work  were
    concerned, the country expert described  the  appellant's  religion  as
    Sunni Muslim, the same as most Kyrgyz nationals.  The expert  suggested
    that it might be more  difficult  for  the  appellant  to  re-establish
    herself as a lone parent but it would not be impossible.  Her  friend's
    mother might be able to help.   The  country  evidence  fell  short  of
    showing that all  Uighur  individuals  were  prevented  from  accessing
    health and accommodation by reason of their  ethnicity.   At  paragraph
    1.4, the expert speculated that the appellant might commit suicide  but
    this was not within his field of expertise.

13.  The expert noted that as a matter of law in Kyrgyzstan,  there  was  no
    discrimination and that the real problems were more  at  street  level.
    That might suggest  that  there  would  be  no  discrimination  in  the
    provision of services.  There were new laws in 2017 and 2018 to  combat
    discrimination and the expert was not in a  position  to  consider  how
    these might have an impact on the attitude of the  authorities  towards
    Uighur people.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe accepted that the country  evidence
    showed difficulties but there were efforts being made by  organisations
    on the ground, as shown at section 2.7 of the report.   There  appeared
    to be four state shelters for those suffering  from  domestic  violence
    and some accommodation was available there,  with  legal  services  and
    counselling.  There was a new Act in Kyrgyzstan providing for  shelters
    for women and nothing to show  that  the  appellant  could  not  access
    these.  With support, the appellant could gain access to accommodation,
    work and health services.  She could relocate near  the  city  of  Osh,
    mentioned by the expert at paragraph 2.4.

14.  The  appellant  currently  has  an  old  identity  document  and  birth
    certificates with  her  Uighur  ethnicity  indicated  but  the  country
    evidence showed that new style identity cards were now issued, which do
    not record ethnicity unless a person opted to have this included in the
    data stored on an embedded microchip.  The expert did not consider  the
    availability of a new identity card.

15.  So far as the threat of forced marriage was concerned, as described  in
    the appellant's witness statement, there  were  nothing  to  show  that
    steps were taken to put the proposal into effect  and  no  evidence  of
    current plans to  force  the  appellant  to  marry  against  her  will.
    Overall, the assessment of risk turned on the influence  and  reach  of
    the appellant's father.  The country evidence did not show that members
    of the Uighur community knew everyone else within the category and  the
    appellant's witness suggested that her father was no longer  interested
    in her.  The appellant spent eight years in Bishkek and there  were  no
    problems  overall.   She  spoke  Russian,  the   second   language   in
    Kyrgyzstan.  In the light of a report on the Uighur people at  page  97
    of the appellant's bundle, which referred to the historic  practice  of
    Uighur families including one husband and multiple wives, a  subsequent
    marriage or divorce would attract no social stigma  and  the  appellant
    returning as a single woman would not be a problem.

16.   There  was  no  substantial  reliance  on  any  political   activities
    undertaken by the appellant in the  United  Kingdom.   The  riots  that
    occurred in Kyrgyzstan in 2010, involving Uighurs, would  not  have  an
    impact on her return now and there was no  evidence  showing  that  the
    Kyrgyzstan authorities monitored nationals outside their  jurisdiction.



17.  The appellant's Facebook page in the  bundle  did  not  show  any  open
    profile.  The country evidence showed that  Uighur  organisations  were
    permitted to exist in Kyrgyzstan, tolerated by the authorities.

18.  A COI  response  note  published  in  August  2018,  responding  to  an
    information request on Kyrgyzstan, contained general information on the
    country and paragraph 1.6 dealt with  mixed  marriages.   The  evidence
    shows that the authorities are seeking to repair the damage  caused  by
    the clashes in 2010 between ethnic  Uzbeks  and  Kyrgyz  people.   Some
    steps were clearly being taken to encourage mixed marriages.

19.  Although the appellant might face difficulty in  obtaining  employment,
    the report from the expert  lacked  detail  on  documents  or  language
    requirements and members of the Uighur community might rely on  friends
    and family.  Similarly, there was little detail on accessing  education
    for the appellant's child.  Overall,  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence
    regarding single parent households.  Notwithstanding  the  difficulties
    the appellant might face, the evidence did not show that she  would  be
    unable to relocate and obtain support outside her home area.

20.  In a brief response, Mr Eaton said that the appellant's child was  born
    out of wedlock.  In  the  years  she  was  with  her  grandmother,  the
    appellant was a teenager and  in  very  different  circumstances.   The
    letter from the appellant's friend was clearly an attempt to show  that
    mediation was tried and the response from the appellant's father was in
    the context of his  daughter  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom,  not
    directly  concerned  with  what  would  happen  if  she   returned   to
    Kyrgyzstan.  Mr Chencinor was making a strong point that  although  the
    law might not discriminate  in  formal  terms,  the  reality  was  that
    institutions and those responsible for providing  security,  education,
    work  and  accommodation  all  did  discriminate  against  the   Uighur
    minority.  Support from the non-governmental sector was  also  unlikely
    to be available.  The report referred to  by  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  the
    appellant's bundle concerned bride  kidnap  and  so  contained  nothing
    specific to this case.  The evidence recorded from the NGO  working  on
    domestic violence, referred  to  in  the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report,
    concerned  an  organisation  carrying  out  lobbying   activities   and
    reporting the unwillingness of the authorities to intervene.  This  was
    not evidence that this  or  any  other  NGO  would  be  able  to  offer
    protection.  The appellant's lack of an ability to speak Kyrgyz was, in
    the expert's view, likely to put her at a disadvantage in  relation  to
    securing work on return and education for her child.

Findings and Conclusions

21.  In this appeal, the  appellant  bears  the  burden  of  proof  and  the
    standard of proof is that of a reasonable degree of likelihood that she
    will face persecutory  ill-treatment  on  return  to  Kyrgyzstan.   The
    appellant's case was advanced on the basis that she is  at  risk  as  a
    Uighur citizen who would be returned with  her  child,  who  has  mixed
    Uighur and Uzbek ethnicity.

22.   As  noted  earlier,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   accepted   the
    appellant's account, having found her to be a credible witness.   There
    has been no attempt to undermine that part of the judge's decision  and
    at the earlier hearing in  this  Tribunal  the  issues  were  helpfully
    narrowed to enable the assessment of risk to proceed on  the  basis  of
    the findings of fact made by  the  judge.   The  appellant,  of  Uighur
    ethnic origin, had a difficult relationship with  her  father  and  was
    subjected to physical abuse by him.  She fled from the family  home  to
    stay with her  maternal  grandmother  at  the  age  of  19.   When  her
    grandmother passed  away  in  2011  and  her  property  was  sold,  the
    appellant relied on friends for support.  The mother of one friend, the
    author of the letter from Ms E, helped the appellant  to  apply  for  a
    student visa so that she could leave Kyrgyzstan.  The appellant arrived
    in this country in September 2011.  She fell pregnant in December  2013
    and gave birth to a son on 1st September 2014.  The  relationship  with
    the child's father broke down in April that  year.   She  made  contact
    with her mother in Kyrgyzstan but was told that her father  would  kill
    her and the baby if he ever saw them again.  The supporting letter from
    Ms E dated 20th May 2018 refers to a  conversation  she  had  with  the
    appellant's father in which he said that he would not care if  she  and
    her son were to die and did not view the appellant as his daughter  any
    more.

23.  The country evidence in the appellant's bundle  strongly  supports  the
    appellant's case that the Uighur community is treated with a  level  of
    suspicion, especially if members of it come from an urban region.   The
    appellant's home area  is  a  suburb  of  the  city  of  Bishkek.   The
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada report on Kyrgyzstan, published
    in February 2015 (no  more  recent  report  was  before  me)  notes  an
    independent researcher who found that Uighurs born in Kyrgyzstan  lived
    predominantly in Uighur neighbourhoods, as did the  appellant  and  her
    family, because of the "impossibility to be assimilated  or  integrated
    into Kyrgyz culture".  A Minority Rights Group report refers to  claims
    of abusive statements by government officials,  describing  Uighurs  as
    terrorists  and  fundamentalists,  contributing  to  negative  societal
    attitudes.  The UN Human Rights Committee published a review in 2014 in
    which experts expressed concern about the apparent lack  of  protection
    against discrimination based on ethnicity and language.  The  Appellant
    speaks Uighur and some Russian but not Kyrgyz.

24.  In the 2015 Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada report,  widespread
    discrimination was described as "applied" by the Kyrgyzstan  government
    against Uighurs.  The  country  evidence  also  shows  high  levels  of
    domestic violence  and,  according  to  several  experts,  insufficient
    engagement  by  the  authorities  and   insufficient   protection   and
    enforcement measures, such that there is only  one  crisis  centre  for
    victims of violence funded by the state.  Human Rights Watch  found  in
    2015 that where women do report domestic violence,  the  response  from
    law enforcement agencies is often found wanting.

25.  The country expert, Mr Robert Chencinor, prepared a report  which  also
    supports the appellant's case.  Mr Chencinor is a respected  expert  on
    events and circumstances in former Soviet Republics, including those in
    Central Asia.  In his report, he notes that the  appellant  lived  with
    her grandmother in the centre of Bishkek and that her parents lived  on
    the outskirts of the city, where most Uighurs live.  Her son, being  of
    mixed Uighur and Uzbek ethnicity, would  face  discrimination  on  this
    basis, in part in consequence of the riots in 2010, between  Uzbek  and
    Kyrgyz communities.

26.  The appellant's father became a strict Muslim and was  violent  towards
    her and her sister.  The expert's opinion is that if she were to return
    with her illegitimate son, her father would perceive this as likely  to
    bring shame on his family.  If the appellant were to seek to return  to
    her home area, it is, I find, reasonably likely that her  father  would
    seek to cause further harm to her.  In this context,  the  letter  from
    the appellant's friend, in which it is suggested that  her  father  has
    disowned her, is clearly  one  that  records  his  reaction  while  his
    daughter is abroad.  The accepted evidence of his past treatment of her
    suggests that the presence of his daughter in Kyrgyzstan, with her son,
    would provoke a markedly different reaction.  So far  as  support  from
    the appellant's friend's mother is concerned, it is again not  possible
    to draw a reasonable inference that this person  would  be  a  reliable
    source of support  on  return,  given  her  limited  role  in  2011  in
    assisting the appellant to leave Kyrgyzstan and to lend  her  funds  at
    that time.

27.  The appellant would  return  with  an  old-style  identity  card  which
    identifies her ethnicity.  In the light of the country evidence and  Mr
    Chencinor's report, this would make it less likely that  she  would  be
    able to obtain protection from threats made by her father, in the light
    of  the  widespread  discrimination  against  Uighur   citizens.    The
    appellant's inability to speak Kyrgyz,  although  she  speaks  Russian,
    would also put her at some disadvantage.  Mr Chencinor draws  attention
    in his report (at 2.10) to widespread corruption in Kyrgyzstan  and  to
    the dismissal of most cases against corrupt officials.  Anti-corruption
    laws are not implemented  effectively.   Mr  Chencinor's  findings  are
    entirely consistent with the country evidence elsewhere in the  bundle,
    including in the Minority Rights Group's  report  at  page  152,  which
    refers to the lax enforcement of laws against gender based violence and
    domestic  violence.   Taking  into  account  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's claim regarding ill-treatment at the hands of  her  father,
    the small size of the Uighur minority and their confinement to Osh  and
    Bishkek and the country evidence showing a disinclination on  the  part
    of the authorities to intervene in domestic violence, compounded by the
    appellant's ethnicity and separation from her family, I find  that  she
    has shown that she is at real risk of ill-treatment in her  home  area.
    Her status as a lone female of Uighur ethnicity, with  an  illegitimate
    child, is such that she would be unable to seek  sufficient  protection
    from the authorities in Bishkek, or in Osh, should she decide  to  move
    there.

28.  The response to an information request  from  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information team is helpful in showing attempts by the  authorities  to
    introduce relative stability, following the April and June 2010  change
    of power and violent conflict between Kyrgyz and Uzbek citizens, but it
    is of little assistance in relation to the position of Uighur citizens.
     Overall, the country evidence shows that the protection  available  is
    not likely to be sufficient to deter the appellant's father  or  anyone
    else intent on causing her harm, this being an important  part  of  the
    assessment of sufficiency of protection in the light of Horvath  [2001]
    1 AC 489.

29.  The country evidence showing the likely limitation of any  response  by
    the authorities also bears on the question whether  the  appellant  may
    reasonably relocate elsewhere in Kyrgyzstan, away from her  home  area,
    with her son.  What is required here is a holistic assessment  and  the
    key question is whether internal relocation is unreasonable  or  unduly
    harsh, in accordance with the principles set out in Januzi [2006]  UKHL
    5.

30.  Much of the country evidence summarised above bears on  this  question.
    The Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada report refers  to  evidence
    from  the  World  Uighur  Congress  ("WUC")  as  showing  "certainly  a
    difference  between  treatment  of  Uighur  and  of  other  groups   in
    Kyrgyzstan,  principally  because  of  China's   influence   over   the
    Kyrgyzstan government specifically in relation to Uighurs".   According
    to Eurasia Net, in a report published in November 2014, the authorities
    have  "upped  their  surveillance  and  repression  of  Uighurs".    Mr
    Chencinor noted that although the legal code  in  Kyrgyzstan  prohibits
    discrimination, it is present in practice at a  street  level.   As  Mr
    Eaton submitted, the appellant's ethnicity, the mixed ethnicity of  her
    son, the absence of a close male relative to assist in a  Sunni  Muslim
    society are relevant matters in the assessment of the  likelihood  that
    the appellant will be able to obtain education for her son,  employment
    or accommodation.  The country evidence regarding  shelters  for  women
    fleeing domestic violence shows, as noted above, that there is only one
    such centre receiving state aid.  As a member of a tiny minority viewed
    with great suspicion in Kyrgyzstan, the country evidence does not  show
    a realistic prospect of securing  suitable  shelter  or  the  means  to
    secure the basic needs the appellant and her son would have on  return.
     Relocation elsewhere would be unreasonable or unduly harsh.

31.  In summary, therefore, the grounds of appeal have been made  out.   The
    appellant is at real risk of  persecution,  for  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason (she is a member of a particular social group as a  lone  female
    and single parent from the Uighur minority) in her  home  area  and  it
    would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for her to relocate elsewhere  in
    Kyrgyzstan, away from the two urban centres where  most  Uighurs  live,
    including the members of her family  who  remain  in  Kyrgyzstan.   For
    these reasons, the appeal is allowed.  The appellant did not advance  a
    human rights case under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

Notice of Decision

32.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is remade as follows:

    Appeal allowed on asylum grounds.



Signed                                  Date: 18th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell





ANONYMITY

I make a direction prohibiting the disclosure of any information  likely  to
lead to the identification of the appellant or her son.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 18th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed, on the  basis  of  evidence  which  was  placed
before the First-tier Tribunal seven days before the hearing, in  breach  of
case management directions  made  earlier  in  the  proceedings.   In  these
circumstances, I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 18th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell


