
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12131/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7th December 2017                 |On 11th December 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       First-tier Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                     Mr mustafa altayeb mustafa al agab
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, Counsel instructed by IAS (Sheffield)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwync, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Mustafa Al-Tayeb Al Agab against  the  decision
    of Judge Caswell, promulgated on the 6th April  2017,  to  dismiss  the
    appeal against refusal of his Protection Claim.

 2. Given the ground upon which permission to appeal has been  granted,  it
    is unnecessary to recite the basis  of  the  Protection  Claim.  It  is
    however necessary to outline the history of the proceedings.

 3. The appeal was originally listed for a full hearing on the 3rd  January
    2017.  That  date  was  vacated  at  the  request  of  the  appellant's
    representatives with a view to affording them more time to prepare  for
    the hearing. On the 14th  December  2016,  the  Tribunal  gave  written
    notice that the final hearing would take place on "Thursday,  30  March
    2017". That notice was sent by first class post to both  the  appellant
    himself and to his representative. The appellant failed  to  appear  on
    that date. The  judge  noted  the  following  at  paragraph  1  of  her
    decision:

         "By 11.20 am on the day of  the  hearing,  the  Appellant  had  not
         arrived. No messages from him had  been  received.  Ms  Dunne  [the
         appellant's representative] informed me that the office  had  tried
         him several times on his mobile phone, and the calls went  straight
         to voicemail. They had also sent him a text asking him to ring  the
         office,  with  no  response.  Ms  Dunne  said  she  did  not   have
         instructions to ask for an adjournment, and that she was  surprised
         and disappointed at the Appellant's failure to attend."

    The judge thereafter concluded that the interests of  justice  did  not
    require her to adjourn the hearing and so she proceeded to hear  it  in
    the appellant's absence.

 4. At 16:15 hours on the following day, Friday the 31st  March  2017,  the
    Tribunal  received   a   facsimile   message   from   the   appellant's
    representatives  stating  that  they  had  been  instructed  that   the
    appellant had attended the Tribunal on that day in the mistaken  belief
    that this was the day his appeal was due to be heard. It concluded:

         'We therefore ask that no adverse credibility findings are made  in
         respect of his non-attendance yesterday.'

 5. For the purposes of this appeal, the critical findings of Judge Caswell
    can be found at paragraph 24 of her decision:

         "Even accepting from Peter Verney's report that there are instances
         where the  Respondent  may  have  drawn  adverse  conclusions  with
         insufficient basis, the fact remains that the Appellant has  failed
         to attend for  his  appeal,  support  his  witness  statement,  put
         himself forward for cross-examination, and answer any concerns.  If
         there had been an explanation for this absence, I would  have  been
         able to ascribe an innocent explanation  for  this,  but  none  was
         forthcoming. In the circumstances, bearing in mind that credibility
         in is issue, that the  expert  cannot  conclusively  say  that  the
         Appellant is Berti, and when the Appellant has failed to attend  to
         support his own appeal, I conclude that the Appellant has failed to
         discharge the burden of proof upon him to establish his case,  even
         to the lower standard."

 6. Reflecting the grounds  that  had  been  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer gave permission  to  appeal  in
    the following terms:

         "1.  It is arguable that in finding that  the  appellant's  absence
            from the hearing fundamentally undermines the  reliability  and
            truthfulness of the his account, the First-tier Tribunal  acted
            unfairly in failing to take into account the fax dated  the  31
            March 2017 explaining the reasons for this absence.

         2.   The First-tier Tribunal decision was signed on  3  April  2017
            and promulgated on 6 April 2017  and  promulgated  on  6  April
            2017, after receipt of the fax."

 7. Despite the erudite submissions of Mr Hussain, I am not persuaded  that
    the failure of the Tribunal to take account  of  the  contents  of  the
    facsimile message, received in the late afternoon of the day after  the
    hearing, can properly be described as 'unfair'. This was evidence  that
    post-dated the hearing. It is thus at least arguable that it would have
    been an error of law to take account of it without  reconstituting  the
    hearing or, at the very least, giving the respondent an opportunity  to
    respond to it in some other way. I am also not blind to  the  realities
    of the situation. As a fee-paid judge, Judge Caswell doubtless took the
    file away at the conclusion of her sitting on the 30th March 2017  with
    a view to preparing her written decision. It would not  therefore  have
    been possible for the  administrative  staff  to  place  the  facsimile
    message on the file at  the  time  when  it  was  received.  The  first
    opportunity to do so would therefore have been when the judge  returned
    the file to the Hearing Centre. This would in all likelihood have  been
    after she had remotely submitted her decision for  promulgation  at  an
    earlier date. It would in my view place an impossible burden  upon  the
    administrative staff if they were required to check every communication
    that arrived after a hearing of an appeal in order to assess whether it
    was necessary to alert the judge to its contents and, if so, to forward
    it to her. It was not in my view 'unfair' for either the administrative
    staff or the judge to assume that all evidence that was relevant to the
    issues in the appeal had been submitted at or prior to the time of  the
    hearing. Insofar as the appellant's absence  at  the  hearing  weakened
    what otherwise would have been the strength of his appeal, he may truly
    be said to have been the author of his own misfortune. I note that  the
    representatives appeared to accept that this was the  case  given  that
    they did not ask for the hearing to be reconstituted to allow  for  the
    appellant  to  give  oral  testimony.  Quite  properly,  they  confined
    themselves to a request that no adverse inferences be  drawn  from  his
    absence at the hearing when assessing the credibility of his claim.

 8. I nevertheless consider that the judge adopted a flawed approach to the
    appellant's absence at the hearing, regardless of the  explanation  for
    it of which I am satisfied she was unaware. The error lies in the  fact
    that the judge appears to have  attached  weight  to  the  lack  of  an
    explanation for the  appellant's  absence  in  her  assessment  of  the
    credibility of his claim. An explanation for  the  appellant's  absence
    would clearly have been necessary to support any application  that  may
    have been made for an adjournment to enable him to attend  at  a  later
    date.  However,  no  such  application  was  made.  The  fact  of   the
    appellant's absence was plainly relevant to his ability to substantiate
    his claim before the Tribunal. One of the consequences of  his  absence
    was that the judge was bound to place  less  weight  upon  his  written
    evidence than may have been the case had he given oral  testimony  that
    had been tested in cross-examination. It  is  important  to  emphasise,
    however, that such reasoning  does  not  involve  the  drawing  adverse
    conclusions from the appellant's absence; it merely  acknowledges  that
    his absence has reduced his ability to substantiate his claim. Much  of
    what  is  said  at  paragraph  24  follows  this  permissible  line  of
    reasoning. However, the judge also appears to have speculated upon  the
    reasons for (as opposed to the fact of) his absence when assessing  the
    credibility of evidence. Thus, the judge refers to the  fact  that  she
    may have been  able  "to  ascribe  an  innocent  explanation  for  this
    absence" had one been forthcoming. The clear  implication  of  this  is
    that the only conclusion to be drawn from the  appellant's  failure  to
    provide an "innocent explanation" for his absence is that none  exists.
    However,  the  difficulty  with  such  reasoning  is  that   it   makes
    assumptions about the appellant's ability to provide an explanation for
    his absence by failing to take account  of  the  possibility  that  the
    cause of the appellant's absence may also be the cause of his inability
    to communicate to his representative and to the Tribunal.  To  take  an
    example that is very far removed from the facts of this case, a witness
    may sustain serious head  injuries  in  road  traffic  accident  whilst
    travelling to the hearing. In such a case, the reason for  the  absence
    of the witness is likely to be the same as his reason to communicate it
    to the Tribunal. In this case the appellant's  failure  to  attend  the
    hearing on the 30th March 2017 is said to have been that he was unaware
    of it. The appellant could not therefore have  explained  something  of
    which he was at that time oblivious. It is therefore inappropriate  for
    the judge to draw any adverse conclusion from the  unexplained  absence
    of an appellant. She should instead have confined herself to noting the
    ways in which his absence meant that he may have been less well  placed
    to substantiate his claim. Moreover, I am unable to say to what  extent
    the error in drawing an adverse conclusion from the appellant's failure
    to provide an innocent explanation for his absence infected  the  other
    (perfectly sustainable) that the judge gave for dismissing the  appeal.
    I have therefore concluded that it should be set aside and remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, with  none  of  the  original  findings  being
    preserved.

 9. I have been conscious throughout that the above error  of  law  that  I
    have identified differs slightly from the basis upon  which  permission
    to appeal was granted. I therefore asked Mr Diwnycz if he  objected  to
    me setting aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal for the reasons  I
    have given in the previous paragraph. He did not.


Notice of Decision

10. The decision of Judge Caswell is set aside for error  of  law  and  the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Caswell)  for
    complete rehearing with no findings of fact preserved.


Signed   Date: 8th December 2017

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal D Kelly

