
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12479/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 May 2019                       |On 4 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     ON
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 6 March 1986. He  has
    been given permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cameron dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 19  March
    2017. He claimed asylum on 3 April 2017. His claim was  refused  on  13
    October 2018.

 3. The appellant's asylum claim was made on the basis that he  feared  the
    Taliban in Afghanistan because of  his  previous  work  for  Tolo  Safi
    Construction Company (TSCC) and  Mohammed  Omaid  Construction  Company
    (MOCC) which led him to be associated with the American military forces
    and the international community. He claimed to  have  worked  for  TSCC
    from 2012, tasked with the  project  of  building  a  computer  science
    faculty at the university in Nangahar, and to  have  started  work  for
    MOCC prior to the completion of his contract with TSCC, in  June  2013,
    building houses for the Afghan military base in Shindand  District.  He
    claimed that he stopped working for MOCC after receiving a  threatening
    letter from the Taliban and that he recommenced  working  for  TSCC  in
    April 2014. He continued receiving threatening letters from the Taliban
    and so he fled Afghanistan in October 2015 and travelled to  Italy.  He
    returned to Afghanistan after a week as his father was angry  with  him
    for having left the country and told  him  to  return  to  support  his
    family and help look after his mother who was  ill.  He  continued  his
    employment with TSCC and then received a third threatening letter  from
    the Taliban. On 10 August 2016 his wife called him and  told  him  that
    their house had been burned down.  He  reported  the  incident  to  the
    police but they did not help him.  He  left  Afghanistan  again  on  25
    August 2016 and travelled to Iran where he stayed for six months before
    travelling  to  Turkey  and  then  Bulgaria  and  he  came  to  the  UK
    clandestinely on 19 March 2017.

 4. The respondent refused the appellant's claim, finding the  evidence  of
    his employment to be inconsistent  and  rejecting  his  claim  to  have
    worked for TSCC and MOCC. The respondent did not accept the appellant's
    account of threats from the Taliban and considered that he  was  at  no
    risk on return to Afghanistan and that his removal would not breach his
    human rights.

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was  heard  on
    26 November 2018  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron.   Judge
    Cameron did not find the appellant to be a credible witness  and  found
    the documentary evidence relating to his claimed employment  with  TSCC
    to be unreliable. The judge did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was
    targeted by the Taliban for working for MOCC or TSCC and did not accept
    that he had the relevant contracts with TSCC. He did  not  accept  that
    the appellant was at risk in his home area or in Kabul if  he  were  to
    relocate and he dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 8 January 2019.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on  three  grounds.  Firstly,
    that the judge had failed to make a finding as to whether he had worked
    for MOCC which was a material error as it impacted on the assessment of
    risk on return in light of the evidence  of  the  targeting  of  people
    perceived to support the international community.  Secondly,  that  the
    judge, in considering internal relocation, had had regard to  the  2016
    UNCHR guidelines rather than the 2018 guidelines in which the UNHCR had
    changed its position on the  availability  of  internal  relocation  to
    Kabul. Thirdly, the judge had failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  in
    relation to Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive,  given  the
    evidence of the deterioration of the situation in Kabul.

 7. Permission was refused in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  subsequently
    granted in the Upper Tribunal on 9 April  2019  on  the  basis  of  the
    judge's findings about MOCC and his  reliance  on  the  previous  UNHCR
    guidelines.





Appeal hearing and submissions

 8. Ms Capel expanded upon the  grounds  of  appeal,  submitting  that  the
    failure by the judge to make a finding on  the  appellant's  employment
    with MOCC was material since the evidence  showed  that  simply  having
    worked for an organisation such as MOCC was sufficient to demonstrate a
    risk of persecution. It could  not  be  said  that  because  the  judge
    rejected  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  worked  for  TSCC  it  was
    inevitable that he would also have rejected  his  claim  in  regard  to
    MOCC, particularly where there was expert evidence  from  Dr  Giustozzi
    that MOCC existed and had an office in Kabul. Ms Capel referred to  the
    UNHCR guidelines of 30 March 2018 and the risk profiles given  at  page
    B73 of the appellant's appeal bundle including those  perceived  to  be
    supporting the international community. She submitted  that  the  judge
    had erred at [90], when considering internal relocation  to  Kabul,  by
    relying on the version of  the  UNHCR  guidelines  referred  to  in  AS
    (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 when  those  were  the
    old guidelines of 2016  which  had  since  been  updated  by  the  2018
    guidelines. The 2018 guidelines at page B93 said that Kabul was  not  a
    safe or reasonable internal flight alternative, contrary to the earlier
    view of the UNHCR. Ms Capel submitted further that the Court of  Appeal
    in AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]
    EWCA Civ 873 had remitted the case to the Upper Tribunal to  reconsider
    the issue of internal relocation to Kabul. In regard to Article  15(c),
    Ms Capel submitted that there should be a departure  from  the  country
    guidance in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT  163  as  the
    situation in Kabul had deteriorated and the  judge  failed  to  address
    that properly.

 9.  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  the  judge  had  clearly  rejected   the
    credibility of the appellant's account as  a  whole  and  that  it  was
    unrealistic to argue that the judge may have found that  the  appellant
    worked for MOCC. In any event the fact that the  appellant  claimed  to
    have had two years of no problems in Afghanistan after just one month's
    employment with MOCC showed that there was not sufficient to place  him
    at risk. With regard to the second ground  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that
    internal relocation was considered in the  alternative  but  the  judge
    found that the appellant was not at risk on his home area, so that  his
    reliance on AS and the previous UNHCR guidelines was immaterial. As for
    ground three and Article 15(c), Mr Lindsay submitted that  AK  remained
    the relevant country guidance and the judge was entitled simply to rely
    upon the guidance. The judge had regard to all  the  evidence  and  was
    entitled to conclude as he did.

10. Ms Capel reiterated the points previously made in response.

Discussion and conclusions

11. I find no merit in the first  ground  of  appeal  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claimed employment with MOCC. Although the  judge  did  not
    make a specific finding rejecting the appellant's claim to have  worked
    for MOCC it is clear that he did not  find  any  of  the  claim  to  be
    credible. The judge's findings  focussed  on  the  appellant's  claimed
    employment with TSCC because there was documentary evidence relied upon
    by the appellant in that regard which he had  to  consider.  The  judge
    found numerous inconsistencies  in  that  evidence  which  led  him  to
    conclude that the evidence was unreliable and that  the  appellant  had
    never worked for that company. The  judge  was  fully  aware  that  the
    respondent did not accept that the  appellant  had  worked  for  either
    company, as observed at [23]. At [6] he referred to  the  evidence  not
    supporting the appellant's claim to have worked for TSCC  and  MOCC  in
    2013 and at [62] he noted contradictory evidence in regard to his claim
    to have worked for MOCC and TSCC in the same period of time. At [71] he
    rejected the appellant's claim to have been targeted by the Taliban for
    working for MOCC or TSCC. In the light of those adverse  findings,  and
    considering also that the appellant had  not  produced  any  supporting
    evidence of his claimed employment with MOCC,  it  is  clear  that  the
    judge did not accept the appellant's  account  of  his  work  for  that
    company. I also agree with Mr  Lindsay  that  even  if  the  judge  had
    accepted that employment, the appellant's claim was that he had  worked
    for MOCC for only a month, and considering that the judge found that he
    had had no problems as a result of his  employment  in  the  two  years
    prior to his departure from Afghanistan, there was clearly insufficient
    evidence to conclude that he was ever perceived to  be  supporting  the
    international community or was ever at risk on that basis.

12. With regard to the second ground, Mr Lindsay correctly pointed out that
    the judge did not find that the appellant was at risk in his home  area
    of Laghman province. His findings on internal relocation to Kabul  were
    in the alternative. Accordingly the  challenge  on  the  basis  of  the
    judge's reliance on the UNHCR's  guidelines  in  relation  to  internal
    relocation to Kabul is immaterial. In any event, and in regard  to  the
    grounds relating to Article  15(c)  and  indiscriminate  violence,  the
    judge was entitled to rely upon the country guidance in AK and was  not
    required to give  detailed  reasons  for  so  doing.  He  plainly  gave
    detailed consideration to the background country information and to the
    claim in regard to the deterioration in the security situation and  was
    entitled to conclude that there was  insufficient  evidence  to  depart
    from the country guidance.

13. For all of these reasons it seems to me that the  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to reach the conclusions that he did  on  risk  on  return  to
    Afghanistan and that he did so upon a careful and  detailed  assessment
    of all the relevant evidence. On the evidence available to him  he  was
    fully entitled to dismiss the appeal on the basis that he  did  and  he
    did not make any errors of law in doing so.

DECISION

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 30 May 2019
