
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12810/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|By UK Court Skype                    |                                     |
|On 4 March 2021                      |On 31 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                     MK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Anzani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


           DECISION MADE PURSUANT TO RULES 34, 39 & 40 (3) OF THE
               TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

   1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Monson sent on 26 September 2019.

   2. Both parties agreed that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error of law for the reasons set out in  the
      grant of permission. They were right to do so.

   3. The judge has misdirected himself with regard to  the  Lessons  Learnt
      and Reconciliation Commission Letter.  The  current  country  guidance
      case GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
      UKUT 00319 (IAC)  states;

           "(7)   The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
           persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in
           detention or otherwise, are:

                 (c)   Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                 Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating  the  Sri
                 Lankan security forces, armed  forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                 authorities in alleged war crimes".

   4. The appellant provided evidence from the Commissioner  of  Enquiry  on
      Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation dated 14 May 2010 acknowledging  the
      appellant's complaint about the abduction of Dishan  Sithum.  This  is
      acknowledged at [69]. In the same  paragraph  the  judge  goes  on  to
      state;

           "Those assisting the appellant in Sri Lanka have not provided  a
           copy of the complaint, so this does not take matters  very  much
           further". But in any event the abduction of Mr Sithum  does  not
           change the fact that the appellant was not himself abducted".

   5. Mr Clark for the respondent conceded that the judge  has  not  made  a
      concrete finding as to whether or not the appellant  has  submitted  a
      genuine complaint to the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation  Commission
      which brings him within the ambit of GJ and  further  if  the  judge's
      intention was to make a negative findings  in  this  respect,  he  has
      failed to provide any nor adequate reasons as to why he  rejected  the
      letter from the Commissioner which was consistent with the appellant's
      evidence in relation to this issue. No-where in  the  decision  is  it
      acknowledged that making such a complaint could  bring  an  individual
      into a risk category identified by GJ. I am in agreement with Mr Clark
      that this is an error of law material to the  outcome  of  the  appeal
      because giving evidence  to  the  Lessons  Learnt  and  Reconciliation
      Commission is in itself a potential risk factor. Had the judge made  a
      positive finding about this complaint, he may have come to a different
      conclusion about the risk to the appellant on entering Sri Lanka.

   6. Mr Clark also conceded that the  judge,  when  assessing  credibility,
      misapplied the country guidance in relation to the ease  or  otherwise
      of leaving  Sri  Lanka  and  the  significance  of  this  factor  when
      determining whether an individual is being sought. At [170] and  [275]
      of GJ it is recognised that an individual may be  able  to  leave  Sri
      Lanka without being stopped even when that individual is wanted by the
      authorities.

   7. I am satisfied that given the country guidance,  the  judge  gave  too
      much weight to the fact that the appellant was able to leave Sri Lanka
      without difficulty in 2011. Further, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge
      failed to recognise that at the time the appellant left Sri Lanka,  he
      was not subject to an  arrest  warrant,  his  passport  had  not  been
      impounded and he was not on a wanted list. The fact that  he  was  not
      stopped by the authorities on exit should have not been used  to  make
      negative credibility findings against him.

   8. Much of the core of the appellant's claim was accepted  by  the  judge
      after  the  appellant  submitted  a   large   amount   of   supporting
      documentation with his appeal. At [66] the  judge  accepted  that  the
      appellant was  suspected  by  his  employer  of  leaking  confidential
      information to the media, thus causing embarrassment to the  SLAF  and
      government. However, the judge then states;

           "However, given that on his own account, he remained at  liberty
           in Sri Lanka until his departure in 2011 - and moreover, that he
           was able to leave the country without any difficulty, travelling
           on his own passport - it is not credible that he remained  under
           suspicion".

   9. This is indicative of the judge's approach to credibility and  infects
      the whole of the  credibility  findings  which  are  material  to  the
      outcome of the appeal.

  10. Both parties agreed that  since  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
      credibility is flawed and because extensive new findings  need  to  be
      made, the appropriate course of action is to set aside the decision in
      its entirety to be heard de novo by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  While
      mindful of statement 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statements
      of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the appellant has yet to have
      an adequate consideration of  his  asylum  appeal  at  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and it would be unfair to deprive him of such  consideration.
      I am therefore in agreement with this course of action.

  11. Rule 40 (1) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provided that the Upper Tribunal may  give  a  decision  orally  at  a
      hearing which I did. Rule 40 (3) provides that the Upper Tribunal must
      provide written reasons for its decision with a decision notice unless
      the parties have consented to the Upper Tribunal  not  giving  written
      reasons. I am satisfied that the parties have given  such  consent  at
      the hearing.

      Notice of Decision

  12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set aside.

  13. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing  in
      front of a judge other than First-tier tribunal judge Monson.

Anonymity Order

  14. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order pursuant to rule 13 of
      the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) Rules 2014.

  15. I continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

      Signed                       Date: 23 March 2021


      R J Owens
      Upper Tribunal Judge Owens
