
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12250/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th March 2020                   |On 15th April 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN
                                     and
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     OSS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, instructed by JWCI
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction has previously been made by the Upper Tribunal.
    For the avoidance of any doubt that direction continues.  Unless and
    until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, OSS is granted anonymity.
    No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify
    him or any member of his family.  This direction applies amongst others
    to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Background


 2. We have been provided with a comprehensive hearing bundle prepared by
    the applicant's representatives, that runs to some 1033 pages.  At
    pages 1 to 9, there is a comprehensive chronology setting out the
    appellant's immigration and offending history.


 3. By way of summary, the appellant, a national of Jamaica, arrived in the
    United Kingdom as a visitor in November 1997 and secured leave to
    remain as a student until 30th April 1999. When that leave came to an
    end, he remained in the UK unlawfully.  The appellant has had his
    claims for leave to remain on international protection and ECHR grounds
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") on a number of occasions
    previously.  An appeal against the respondent's decision dated 3rd
    April 2003 to refuse a claim for asylum was dismissed for reasons set
    out in a decision promulgated by the FtT on 30th June 2003.  The
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 1st March 2011
    to refuse leave to remain on Article 8 grounds was dismissed for
    reasons set out in a decision of FtT Judge Morris promulgated on 24th
    June 2011.  The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of
    6th September 2012, refusing leave to remain on Article 3 and 8 grounds
    was allowed on Article 8 grounds by FtT Judge Herbert OBE for reasons
    set out in a decision promulgated on 30th October 2012.  Following that
    successful appeal, the appellant was granted limited leave to remain
    for 30 months valid until 25th April 2015.


 4. On 10 September 2013, the appellant was convicted at Blackfriars Crown
    Court of seven counts of theft and received a 12-month sentence of
    imprisonment.  Following that conviction and sentence, the appellant
    was served with a notice of liability to automatic deportation on 11th
    October 2013. The appellant made a human rights claim, contending that
    his deportation would be contrary to Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  A
    deportation order was signed on 8th October 2015 and the appellant's
    human rights claim was refused by the respondent on 13th October 2015.
    The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by FtT Judge
    Phillips for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 20 May 2016.


 5. The appellant made further representations to the respondent in March
    2017 and most recently, an appeal against the respondent's decision of
    3rd October 2018 to refuse a protection and human rights claim was
    dismissed by FtT Judge Clarke for reasons set out in a decision
    promulgated on 1st May 2019.


 6. The decision of Judge Clarke was set aside for reasons set out in a
    decision promulgated by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson and Upper Tribunal
    Judge Mandalia promulgated on 18th October 2019.  The Upper Tribunal
    concluded there were material errors of law in the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Clarke.  The decision was set aside, and it was
    directed that the decision would be remade in the Upper Tribunal.  The
    appeal was listed for a resumed hearing before us to remake the
    decision.  We heard submissions from the parties' representatives and
    reserved our decision.  We dismiss the appeal for the reasons that
    follow.


The appellant's criminal behaviour


 7. The appellant's offending history is uncontroversial.   We were
    provided with an up-to-date printout of the appellant's PNC record by
    Mr Lindsay.  It is useful to set out the convictions amassed by the
    appellant.


      a. On 2nd March 2004, the appellant was convicted at Highbury Corner
         Magistrates Court of 'Theft - Shoplifting' and was sentenced to a
         12-month conditional discharge.


      b. On 10th October 2005, he was convicted at Haringey Magistrates
         Court of using threatening, abusive, insulting words or behaviour
         with intent to cause fear or provocation of violence.  Sentencing
         was adjourned indefinitely.


      c. On 7th March 2006 the appellant was convicted at Wood Green Crown
         Court of one count of 'theft from a person' and sentenced to one-
         month imprisonment.  He was also convicted of one count of 'common
         assault' for which he was sentenced to 3-months imprisonment to run
         consecutively.


      d. On 29th June 2007, the appellant was convicted at Thames
         Magistrates Court of failing to surrender at an appointed time. He
         was fined �50.


      e. On 14th April 2008, he was convicted at Haringey Magistrates Court
         of possessing a knife/blade/sharp/pointed article in a public place
         and sentenced to an unpaid work requirement of 100 hours.  On 18th
         July 2010 the appellant was convicted at Highbury Corner
         Magistrates Court of failing to comply with the requirement of a
         community order, from the original conviction on 14th April 2008
         and the sentence was subsequently varied to a 67-hour unpaid work
         requirement.


      f. On 13th August 2013 the appellant was convicted at North London
         Magistrates Court of seven counts of theft and he was committed to
         the Crown Court for sentencing. On 10th September 2013, the
         appellant was sentenced at Blackfriars Crown Court to 12 months
         imprisonment on each count, to run concurrently.


 8. It is appropriate at this stage to record the sentencing remarks of His
    Honour Judge Pillay that put in context the seven counts of theft for
    which the appellant was sentenced on 10th September 2013.


         "... In essence the method that you adopted was similar in all
         these cases; what would happen is that you would target, and I use
         that word advisedly, a victim; you would observe and keep watch
         over that victim. Having so identified your target, you would then
         move in effectively, either distracting the victim or bumping
         accidentally, supposedly into the victim and in that process very
         adeptly you would then remove their phones or their wallets. In
         fact the bulk of your thieving involved the theft of iPhones and
         Blackberry's or high-value mobile phones, apart from the one
         occasion involving [Mr R], when you robbed him, or not robbed but
         stole from him his wallet and freedom pass.


         As I have said the circumstances which attend these offences were
         all very similar. Two of the worst instances were on 1st September
         of last year, when you in effect stole the phone from [Mr M].  He
         was prepared to challenge you in order to retrieve his phone and he
         gave chase and in due course you pulled out a small black item and
         said, "I'm going to stab you".  It is true to say that [Mr M] did
         not see any blade but did see something which appeared to be a hand
         knife and therefore, taking the logical view that it might have
         been a knife....  and you managed to get away. And indeed went on
         to commit a number of offences until about August of this year,
         when [Mr R] fell under your observation; he was 89 years of age, he
         is partially sighted. And indeed, what you did was remove his
         wallet and freedom pass from him before making good your getaway.
         Needless to say in due course you were caught but CCTV camera (sic)
         and as a consequence you were identified and the full extent of
         your criminality became aware and available, and you no doubt when
         confronted with that evidence, no doubt the benefit of it being
         CCTV capturing your misdeeds (sic), you entered pleas of guilty,
         when the matter first came before the Magistrates Court.


         You were born in 1959 and you have some six appearances before
         these courts, only two of which are relevant. In 2004 for
         shoplifting you were given a conditional discharge and in 2006 for
         theft from a person and common assault, you were given a total
         sentence of four months in all. That did not appear to deter you
         from this kind of criminality.


         As I have already observed, when people's mobile phones are stolen,
         with it brings an awful lot of hardship, because their contact
         details and lists are destroyed and lost, their personal
         photographs perhaps are lost, their personal details are lost, all
         of it no doubt producing anguish and anxiety in your victims.


         ... Here, I have got to take the view, or take into account the
         fact that there was serial offending over a relatively short space
         of time. Secondly, on one of these occasions there was at least a
         threat of a weapon being used, on the second occasion, the last one
         in fact, 8th August, you actually attacked an 89-year-old man
         before taking the items from him. And having regard to the
         aggravating features that I have already referred to in my
         judgement this calls for a custodial prison sentence ... Doing the
         balancing exercise that I must perform, the least sentence I can
         pass on any one of these offences is one of 12 months in custody.
         This will be on each offence. It will run concurrent one with the
         other, making a total of 12 months in all ..."


 9. In addition to the convictions that we have referred to, the PNC record
    discloses 4 cautions.  On 28th January 2003, the appellant was
    cautioned for possession of cannabis. On 24th December 2003 he was
    cautioned for shoplifting.  On 5th June 2007, the appellant was
    cautioned for possession of a Class A drug and on 21st November 2015,
    he was cautioned for common assault.


The issues


10. The issues to be determined in the appeal before us are set out in the
    appellant's skeleton argument in the following terms:


      a. Whether deportation of the appellant would be in breach of Article
         8.  The applicant claims that he meets the requirements for the
         exception to deportation set out at paragraph 399(a) of the
         Immigration Rules and/or Exception 2 set out at s117C of the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;


      b. Whether deportation of the appellant would be in breach of Article
         3 because of the suicide risk;


      c. Whether deportation of the appellant would be in breach of Article
         3 because of the appellant's mental health and the risk of
         destitution.


11. In the error of law decision promulgated on 18th October 2019, the
    following findings of Judge Clarke were preserved:


      a. For the purposes of s 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002, Exception 1 does not apply.  That is, the
         appellant has not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
         most of his life; and the appellant is not socially integrated in
         the United Kingdom; [paragraph 95]


      b. The appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with JH,
         albeit they do not live together and do not meet the definition of
         'partner' under the immigration rules; [paragraph 97]


      c. The appellant is involved in the children's lives in that he has
         contact with them every other day and this has been the practice
         since the youngest child was born.  The appellant will play, bath
         and put them to bed. He also takes the eldest child to nursery;
         [paragraph 100]


      d. The effect of the appellant's deportation on JH would not be unduly
         harsh.  JH is a British citizen and will continue to receive all
         the benefits that flow from being a British citizen.  JH is
         currently living with her 2 sons on her own and the appellant's
         deportation will not interfere with those living arrangements.
         JH's family live in Cornwall but there is no credible reason why
         they cannot help JH from time to time.  Furthermore, there is no
         credible evidence that the help and support JH receives from the
         appellant's family, would cease simply because he is deported;
         [paragraph 107]


      e. It would not be unduly harsh for JH to go to Jamaica on account of
         her asthma; [paragraph 110]


      f. The appellant was brought up by his grandmother who is now
         deceased, and his aunt came to the UK as part of the Windrush
         generation and has lived here since then.  Nevertheless, there is
         no credible evidence that the appellant does not have extended
         family in Jamaica that could help him, JH and the children to
         settle in Jamaica; [paragraph 109]


The appellant as a vulnerable witness


12. The appellant relies inter alia upon the expert evidence of Dr Joanna
    Curwen, a Consultant Psychiatrist, who has been involved in the
    treatment of the appellant since 2014.  In her letter of 1st February
    2019, Dr Curwen expressed the opinion that it would be too traumatic
    for the appellant to give evidence at the hearing of his appeal that
    was listed on 18th February 2019, given its adversarial nature.


13. The appellant also relies upon a report prepared by Dr Alicia
    Griffiths, a Clinical Psychologist instructed by the appellant's
    representatives, to give her expert clinical opinion upon various
    matters.  In her report of 26th February 2020, at section 5.5, Dr
    Griffiths also expresses the opinion that she does not believe the
    appellant is able to give oral evidence at the hearing of his appeal.
    The appellant had told her that he would not feel able to give evidence
    and it would be too painful for him to talk to other people about his
    case. In her opinion, the appellant's ability to give evidence is
    compromised by the difficulties related to his symptoms of depression
    with psychotic features. She expresses the opinion that the appellant
    is likely to struggle with an adversarial Tribunal and particularly
    anything involving a direct nature of questioning. She states that his
    capacity to tolerate any heightened emotion when having to respond to
    detailed questions, is limited. In her opinion, the appellant would
    find it incredibly challenging if he were asked to give evidence and
    she believes he would be very scared and preoccupied with worry about
    being arrested. In her opinion, the impact of giving oral evidence and
    being questioned could reinforce negative beliefs and trigger feelings
    of entrenched shame. Dr Griffiths states that if the appellant must
    give evidence, adjustments need to be made so the evidence is heard at
    a very slow, steady pace, with frequent breaks alongside a lot of
    reassurance.


14. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Kiai indicated at the outset that the
    appellant would not be giving evidence.  His evidence is set out in two
    witness statements that have been prepared by the applicant with the
    assistance of his representatives.  In reaching our decision, we have
    carefully considered the content of each of those witness statements.
    We make it clear that in considering the appellant's evidence we have
    had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010: Child,
    Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance, and our assessment
    of the appellant's evidence has been considered in the round, taking
    due account of the medical evidence.


The evidence


15. The Tribunal has been provided with a comprehensive bundle that is
    relied upon by the appellant running to some 1033 pages. Tab A of that
    bundle includes a comprehensive chronology and the witness statements
    relied upon by the appellant. We pause to note that the appellant's
    witness statements are dated 5th February 2019 and 5th April 2019.  The
    witness statement of the appellant's partner is dated 30th January
    2019.  Those witness statements and the letters from the appellant's
    aunt and others that support his appeal, all pre-date the hearing of
    the appeal before FtT Judge Clarke, and the error of law decision of
    the Upper Tribunal


16. In the error of law decision promulgated on 18th October 2019, the
    Upper Tribunal directed inter alia that "the appellant shall file and
    serve any further evidence that he seeks to rely upon, within 21 days
    of this decision being sent to the appellant".  At a Case Management
    Review Hearing on 12th November 2019, the Upper Tribunal directed inter
    alia that "the appellant shall file and serve any further evidence to
    relied upon at the resumed hearing of the appeal, including any expert
    evidence, by 4pm on 17th January 2020".  No further witness statement
    by the appellant or his partner has been filed with the Tribunal. The
    evidence that we have from the appellant and his partner is therefore
    precisely the same evidence that was before the FtT previously, and we
    have no evidence that causes us to revisit the preserved findings.


17. We have been provided, in Tab B, with the expert evidence relied upon
    by the appellant.  That includes a report dated 26th February 2020
    prepared by Dr Alicia Griffiths.  We also have letters from Dr Joanna
    Curwen, the most recent dated 15th November 2019 and reports prepared
    by the independent social workers, the most recent dated 14th January
    2020 and completed by Nezlin Veronica Newell.  The appellant's bundle
    also includes what is described as a "General report on country
    conditions for deportees on return to Jamaica" by Luke de Noronha in
    Tab D, at pages 624 to 644 and a letter from Luke de Noronha, dated
    11th February 2019, in Tab B, at pages 137 to 142.


18. At the outset of the hearing before us, Ms Kiai made an application to
    adduce further evidence that was not included in the extensive bundle
    already before the Tribunal. She sought permission to rely upon a
    'Speech and Language Therapy Summary Report' from the Barnet, Enfield
    and Haringey Mental Health NHS Trust dated November 2019 relating to
    the appellant's eldest son, ("JIS"). The report confirms that [JIS]
    attended a Social Communication Emotional Regulation Transactional
    Support ("SCERTS") review Speech and Language Therapy appointment,
    designed to help determine the SCERTS level and an appropriate target
    for the child in order to provide strategies for home practice. The
    report confirms [JIS] presents with social communication difficulties
    that can sometimes be explained by a diagnosis of autism spectrum
    disorder. The author expresses the opinion that a Paediatrician is
    required to carry out in-depth case history, observation, and a review
    of progress and skills, and to consider the information.  Ms Kiai also
    sought to rely upon a letter from the Paediatric Audiology and Audio
    Vestibular Medicine Team, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust dated
    18th December 2019, confirming that a referral has been received in
    respect of [JIS] and he has been accepted onto their waiting list. Ms
    Kiai informed the Tribunal that the appellant's representatives were
    unaware of the ongoing investigations in respect of the health of the
    eldest child, and that the two documents were only provided by the
    appellant and his partner to her this morning.  Mr Lindsay objected to
    the further evidence being admitted on the morning of the hearing.
    Despite the absence of a reasonable explanation for the failure to
    disclose the evidence earlier, we reluctantly gave permission for the
    short report and letter to be relied upon.  The two documents are
    brief. The health of the eldest child and issues regarding his speech
    and language are already referred to in the reports of the independent
    social workers.  In our judgement, it is in the interests of justice
    for us to have as much evidence as possible regarding the health of the
    children, in circumstances where we must have regard to the best
    interests of the children and are considering the impact that
    deportation of the appellant will have upon his very young children.


19. Ms Kiai also informed us that the appellant and his partner had been
    unable to arrange childcare and had attended the hearing with their
    three very young children.  The appellant's partner had attended and,
    if required, would adopt her witness statement and be tendered for
    cross examination.  Ms Kiai indicated that the only additional question
    that she proposed to ask the appellant's partner, was to confirm that
    their eldest son remains under investigation in respect of his speech
    and language difficulties.  We informed Ms Kiai, that would not be
    necessary because we have admitted the further evidence which confirms
    that further investigation is continuing.  Mr Lindsay confirmed that if
    the evidence of the appellant's partner is limited to that set out in
    her witness statement, he did not require her to be tendered for cross
    examination.


20. We heard submissions from both Mr Lindsay and Ms Kiai that are set out
    in our record of proceedings and which we have carefully considered.
    We should record that after hearing submissions from Mr Lindsay, and
    during the course of submissions being made by Ms Kiai, it was
    submitted that notwithstanding the absence of any further witness
    statement from the appellant's partner, we should attach significant
    weight to what was said by the appellant's partner as set out in the
    report of the independent social worker Nezlin Newell.  We pointed out
    to Ms Kiai that that is 'hearsay evidence', and if the appellant's
    partner had intended to elaborate on her evidence, there had been ample
    opportunity for her to file a further witness statement.  The
    concession by Mr Lindsay that he did not require the appellant's
    partner to be tendered for cross examination was clearly upon the basis
    that the evidence of the appellant's partner is set out in her witness
    statement.  Ms Kiai invited us to adjourn the hearing for a short time,
    for her to prepare a very short witness statement from the appellant's
    partner.  She was quite prepared, if necessary, for the appellant's
    partner to be called to give evidence and tendered for cross
    examination, so that Mr Lindsay had a fair opportunity to test her
    evidence.  She submits it is in the interests of justice for all the
    evidence to be before the Tribunal, and the appellant's representatives
    had assumed the further evidence of the appellant's partner could be
    incorporated into the report of the independent social worker, and a
    witness statement was not therefore necessary.


21. We refused the application.  We acknowledge the Upper Tribunal may
    admit evidence whether or not the evidence would be admissible in a
    civil trial and whether or not the evidence was available to a previous
    decision maker.  We have already referred to the directions previously
    made by the Upper Tribunal following the error of law decision.  The
    appellant has had ample opportunity to file and serve any evidence upon
    which he intends to rely, in accordance with the directions made. There
    is no good reason for the failure to comply with the directions.  There
    is nothing to preclude a party from advancing their case on the basis
    of what is said in another document, albeit hearsay in form, but as we
    drew to counsel's attention when she was making her submissions, it is
    rather surprising in an appeal where the Tribunal is presented with a
    bundle spanning some 1033 pages over two lever arch files, that the
    appellant's representatives have failed to file an updated statement
    from either the appellant or his partner in particular.  We note there
    is no statement from the appellant's partner even to confirm that she
    has read the content of the report of the independent social worker,
    and that report accurately reflects what she said to the independent
    social worker.  Neither have we been provided with the contemporaneous
    notes made by the independent social worker to establish that the
    report impartially records everything that was said by the appellant's
    partner, rather than only that information that the author of the
    report considered to be relevant. In our judgement, it would be unfair
    to admit yet further evidence from the appellant's partner after we had
    already heard submissions made on behalf of the respondent.  We will of
    course have regard to what is said in the report of the independent
    social worker, but the weight to be attached to the evidence attributed
    to the appellant's partner in that report, will be a matter for us.


22. It is of course entirely impractical for us to refer in this decision
    to all the evidence that is set out in the extensive bundle prepared by
    the appellant's representatives. We do however make it clear that in
    reaching our decision we have had regard to all of the evidence whether
    that evidence is expressly referred to or not, in this decision.


The Legal Framework


23. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act") defines a
    foreign criminal, a person not a British citizen who is convicted in
    the UK of an offence and, inter alia, sentenced to a period of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months. Section 32(4) of the 2007 Act sets
    outs out the clear proposition that deportation of a foreign criminal
    is conducive to the public good. That is a statement of public policy
    enacted by the legislature, which the courts and tribunals are obliged
    to respect. Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act requires the Secretary of
    State to make a deportation order in respect of every foreign criminal,
    subject to the exceptions set out in section 33.  Insofar as is
    relevant that is:


         "(2) Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
             pursuance of the deportation order would breach-


             (a)  a person's Convention rights, or


             (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
             Convention.


         ...


         (7)  The application of an exception-


             (a)  does not prevent the making of a deportation order;


             (b)  results in it being assumed neither that deportation of
                  the person concerned is conducive to the public good nor
                  that it is not conducive to the public good;


         but section 32(4) applies despite the application of Exception 1 or
         4.".


24. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
    Act") informs the decision making in relation to the application of the
    section 33 exceptions. Section 117A in Part 5A provides that, when a
    court or tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made
    under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to respect for
    private and family life under Article 8, and, as a result, would be
    unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998, the court, in considering the
    public interest question, must (in particular) have regard to the
    considerations listed in section 117B and, additionally, in cases
    concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the considerations
    listed in section 117C.  So far as is material to this appeal, the
    following provisions set out in s117C are relevant:


         "Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
         criminals


         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
             the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
             and 2


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
             into account where a court or tribunal is considering a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that
             the reason for the decision was the offence or offences for
             which the criminal has been convicted."


25. The Immigration Rules set out the approach to be followed by the
    Secretary of State where a foreign criminal liable to deportation
    claims that the deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8 ECHR.  So far as relevant to this appeal,
    the immigration rules state:


         Revocation of deportation order


         390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
         considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
         following:


             (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;


             (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;


             (iii)    the interests of the community, including the
             maintenance of an effective immigration control;


             (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any
             compassionate circumstances.


         390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.


         ...


         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh
         information coming to light which was not before the appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage of time since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.


         ...


         396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall
         be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the
         public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make a
         deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK Borders
         Act 2007.


         397. A deportation order will not be made if the person's removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention. Where
         deportation would not be contrary to these obligations, it will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in
         deportation is outweighed.


         Deportation and Article 8


         A398. These rules apply where:


             (a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
             deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


             (b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
             against him to be revoked.


         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and


             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years.


             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or


             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because, in the
             view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
             particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in
             assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or
             399A applies and, if it does not, the public interest in
             deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where
             there are very compelling circumstances over and above those
             described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -


             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
             the UK, and


                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


                  (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                  immigration decision; and in either case


                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and


                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                      or


             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and


                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration
                  status was not precarious; and


                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


                  (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
                  remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.


         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -


             (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most
             of his life; and


             (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and




             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his
             integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
             deported.


Findings and conclusions


26. In his witness statements, the appellant refers to his relationship
    with [JH] and confirms that they met in December 2014 and he proposed
    to her in January 2015. They married on 19th September 2015.  He states
    that if he were to be separated from [JH], he does not know how he
    would cope. He accepts that they do not live together but are still
    together and "just taking things slowly".  There are now three children
    of that relationship.  The eldest, "JIS" was born on 7th December 2016
    and is now 3 years old.  "JES" was born on 1st March 2018 and is now 2.
     The youngest child, "JAS" as born on 20th August 2019 and is now 6
    months old.  In his witness statement dated 5th February 2019, the
    appellant states:


         "24. Although I don't live with [JH] and the boys, I spend all my
         waking hours with them. I only don't live with them because of my
         bail conditions and as [my aunt] still needs my help. I'm an active
         father. I bathe the boys, change them, I push them to the park, I
         go to the doctor with them. [JIS] has just started nursery and I
         drop him off and pick him up. I look after [JES] whilst [JIS] is at
         nursery.


         25.  I couldn't live without looking after the boys, there is so
         much I want to offer them, to guide them. I am watching, guiding
         and helping [JH] too.  The age difference sometimes worries me, I
         have said this to her more than once. I am doing my best and want
         to do my best. [JH] says age is a number. I was worried about
         meeting her mum and her dad, but they both like me, as does her
         brother and sisters. They are warm and loving people and they have
         never made me feel funny about things. This assured me that I
         should not worry about the age gap as I've been accepted by [JH]
         and her family."


27. In his witness statement the appellant claims [JH] and his sons would
    not be able to manage without him, and they could not go to Jamaica
    with the appellant if he is deported. He states that [JH] has never
    left the UK, she does not have a passport and Jamaica is dangerous and
    he could not provide for them. The appellant also claims that his
    mental health would deteriorate in Jamaica. He states that his sons are
    a protective factor and he relies on his family for support.


28. The appellant's partner's evidence is set out in her witness statement
    dated 30th of January 2019.  In her witness statement, the appellant's
    partner states:


         "4.  [JIS] started nursery on the 14 January 2019. [The appellant]
         and I take it in turns to take him to and pick him up from nursery.
         The nursery staff know [the appellant] as [JIS's] father and they
         know that he is involved in his son's life. [The appellant] is just
         as much an involved parent as I am. We share the care.


         5.   When [the appellant] was released from detention, I would go
         and see [the appellant] every other day. He would come to my house,
         he would check on the children, play with them, take them to the
         park and make sure that we had all eaten. We take it in turns to
         cook. [The appellant is also very active in getting the boys to
         bed, he will bathe them, tuck them in bed and read them a story. As
         [the appellant] is still subject to his bail conditions, something
         he takes very seriously and would not want to breach, he would then
         go home to sleep so as to comply with his bail conditions."


29. There is a preserved finding that the appellant has a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with his partner, [JH], albeit they do not live
    together.  Whether a person has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with a child turns upon the particular facts of the case.
    There is a preserved finding that the appellant is involved in the
    children's lives in that he has contact with them every other day, and
    this has been the practice since the youngest child was born.  In the
    report of the independent social worker, Nezlin Newell, it is said that
    the appellant stated that the immigration proceedings cause him to feel
    incapable as a parent, as he can only offer practical support to the
    children rather than financial support.  He confirmed to the social
    worker the care and support that he provides to his children.  [JH]
    described the appellant to be a doting father and that their sons [JIS]
    and [JES] adore their father.


30. The birth of the youngest child post-dates the appellant's witness
    statements, but we are prepared to accept that the love and care the
    appellant expresses towards the two older children, applies equally to
    the youngest child.  It is in our judgement clear that the appellant,
    albeit not living with his partner and children, has significant
    involvement in the day-to-day lives of the children and there is
    nothing in the evidence before us to suggest that he has anything other
    than a full parental relationship with his children.  On the evidence
    before us, we find the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with each of his three children.


31. The issue for us to determine is whether (a) it would be unduly harsh
    for the children to live in Jamaica; and (b) it would be unduly harsh
    for the children to remain in the UK without the appellant.


The best interests of the children


32. S55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 requires the
    respondent to make arrangements for ensuring that her functions in
    relation to immigration, asylum or nationality are discharged having
    regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who
    are in the UK.  The children are all British citizens, and although the
    children are very young and not in education, there is at least some
    evidence that [JIS] presents with challenging behaviour at times due to
    difficulties in communicating his needs. The independent social worker
    refers to speech delay that leaves [JIS] feeling frustrated and unable
    to express his emotions, and that manifests itself in aggressive
    outbursts at times. The independent social worker notes the children
    are entitled to a number of resources and services at no cost to the
    family.  Although there has been no diagnosis confirming [JIS] is
    autistic, we are satisfied from the limited medical evidence before us
    that his health is being monitored and the appellant and his partner
    are being assisted to identify and put in place strategies to improve
    his speech and language skills.  We find it is in the best interests of
    the children that they remain in the UK.  It is in the best interests
    of the children to continue to have a good and stable relationship with
    both their parents, who are their primary carers.  This is a primary
    consideration although it is not the primary consideration and can be
    outweighed by other factors; ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 11.


Would it be unduly harsh for the children to live in Jamaica?


33. In considering whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to
    live in Jamaica, we remind ourselves that there is a preserved finding
    that it would not be unduly harsh for [JH] to go to Jamaica on account
    of her asthma.  More importantly, there is a preserved finding that
    there is no credible evidence that the appellant does not have extended
    family in Jamaica that could help him, [JH] and the children to settle
    in Jamaica.  As there is no further evidence from the appellant and/or
    his partner in this respect, the position remains as set out in the
    preserved finding.


34. In his witness statement dated 5th February 2019, the appellant claims
    that he would be unable to support his family in Jamaica.  In her
    report, Nezlin Newell, at section 8, considers whether it would be
    unduly harsh for the children to relocate to Jamaica. She notes [JES]
    attends nursery and [JIS] attends school.  Their parents report them to
    be settled and that [JIS] is receiving support around his speech and
    language difficulties.  The independent social worker states that
    should the children leave the UK, they would need to re-establish the
    relationships they have built with the teaching staff who know and
    understand the children's educational needs and have made provisions to
    support [JIS] in particular. The independent social worker refers to
    the support network available to the family in the UK including
    godparents who actively provide support to the children. The
    independent social worker reports that leaving the UK would mean a loss
    of the current support networks the family have in the UK.  The
    independent social worker states:


         "[JIS], [JES] and [JAS] are three young boys' of dual heritage and
         British by nationality. It was detailed in the previous social work
         report that Jamaica is a country with a number of social and
         economic problems and the cultural differences may make it
         difficult for the children and their mother to adjust to. Whilst
         [the appellant] is originally from Jamaica, he has not lived there
         for over 20 years. Hence he too is likely to find it difficult to
         adjust.


         He is not aware of any direct relatives residing in Jamaica. He
         left Jamaica in 1997 and his grandmother who was caring for him
         passed away. [The appellant] has never had a relationship with his
         birth parents and so I concur with the previous social workers view
         that should the children return to Jamaica with their parents,
         there is no clear identified support for them as a family. This
         places the parents and consequently the children in a potentially
         vulnerable situation where they are likely to experience hardship,
         placing them at significant risk of harm."


35. The independent social worker does not in fact answer the question
    posed; "Would it be unduly harsh for [JIS], [JES] and [JAS] to relocate
    to Jamaica?".  What is also striking about the report is that in
    section 4, the author confirms that a copy of the Upper Tribunal's
    error of law decision promulgated on 18th October 2019 was provided to
    her. Notwithstanding, the preserved findings set out at paragraph [26]
    of the Upper Tribunal's decision, the author of the report simply
    refers to the account given by the appellant and disregards entirely
    those preserved findings. For example, the author disregards entirely
    the preserved finding that there is no credible evidence that the
    appellant does not have extended family in Jamaica that could help him,
    [JH] and the children to settle in Jamaica.


36. We have found the report of the independent social worker to be of
    little assistance in this respect. In our judgement, the question
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to live in Jamaica
    turns upon the position that [JIS] would find himself in.  We accept
    that [JIS] has speech delay that leaves him feeling frustrated and
    unable to express his emotions and that manifests itself in aggressive
    outbursts at times. Although there has been no diagnosis confirming
    [JIS] is autistic, we are satisfied from the very limited medical
    evidence before us that his health is being monitored and the appellant
    and his partner are being assisted to identify and put in place
    strategies to improve his speech and language skills.  There is an
    absence of evidence to establish that any treatment required by [JIS]
    would be available in Jamaica.  Although he would have the support of
    his parents, the absence of treatment will plainly have an impact upon
    the health and well-being of [JIS] and we are satisfied in all the
    circumstances that it would be unduly harsh for the children to live in
    Jamaica.  Although we find it would be unduly harsh for the children to
    live in Jamaica, there is however nothing preventing the appellant,
    [JH] and the children living with the appellant in Jamaica, if that is
    the choice that is made by the family.


Would it be unduly harsh for the children to live in the UK without the
appellant?


37. We have already referred to the evidence of the appellant and his
    partner as set out in their witness statements. In his witness
    statement, the appellant also states - "... I can't see myself just
    talking to the boys on the phone, this is not right, this is not how
    the relationship between fathers and sons should be. I don't even know
    what Skype is.".  In his witness statement dated 5th February 2019, the
    appellant states:


         "35. [JH] and the boys would not be able to manage without me. I
         just can't see it. Her family are not local, they lived miles away
         in Cornwall. I would be so worried about her. There is a park
         behind her house where we take the boys. Criminal activity goes on
         there. There was a shed that was burned down and a few weeks ago
         when I was leaving [JH's] at night there were a number of police in
         the street. You read in the papers about all the stabbings and
         killings. It terrifies me, that without a father figure my boys
         could end up living this kind of lifestyle.


         ...


         37.  I feel that my mental health would get worse in Jamaica. My
         boys are a protective factor and I rely on my family to for
         support. In Jamaica there would be no one to prompt me to get help
         ..."


38. In her witness statement, the appellant's partner describes the day-to-
    day arrangements for the care of the children.  She states:


         "3.  I am terrified that [the appellant] could be deported. I often
         think how I would cope with two small children, doing the nursery
         runs and caring for my boys, all without [the appellant's] help.


         ...


         10.  I rely on [the appellant] for both practical and emotional
         support. The practical support is everything he does for me and the
         boys on a day-to-day basis and it is a lot. Emotionally, he's
         constantly there for me and the boys. I am more likely to panic
         about the situation then sic [the appellant], so he reassures me
         and calms me down. He knows how to talk me so that I know that
         everything will be okay. Financially, it is difficult for [the
         appellant] to help me as he is not allowed to work or to claim
         benefits because of his immigration status.  [The appellant's aunt]
         helps out with the children, she gave the money for Christmas as
         did [the appellant's uncle].


         ...


         28.  If [the appellant] were deported the boys and I wouldn't be
         able to stay in contact with [the appellant] through email and
         phone. It's just not the same as having him here in person. [The
         appellant] doesn't have an email address. He's never used Skype. He
         wouldn't know how to use it; I have never seen him use a computer.
         There would also be the time difference between Jamaica and the
         United Kingdom. More importantly, the boys are too young to
         understand that a man on a screen is their father. They would lose
         their bond. It would also cost money for him to access this in
         Jamaica. I don't know how he would afford this, and I doubt whether
         the connection is very good or reliable."


39. The independent social worker addresses the issue in section 9 of her
    report.  She confirms the children have a close relationship with their
    father although [JES] tends to cling to his mother. The appellant's
    partner reported that the children love going to play football with
    their father and the appellant tends to provide stimulation for the
    children to keep them actively engaged in physical activity and play.
    [JIS] is described as a 'daddies' boy' and is said to require a lot
    more attention due to his speech delay. He expresses himself through
    his actions.  The independent social worker states the bond [JIS] has
    with his father is crucial to his development and should the appellant
    leave the UK, the children would grow up without their father and this
    could lead to trauma due to the separation from their care giver.  The
    independent social worker states the children have a stable,
    affectionate relationship with their father who is clearly a very
    significant person in their life. It is said the appellant enhances the
    children's understanding of identity just by his presence in their life
    and role modelling positive behaviour towards them. The independent
    social worker indicates that deportation would prevent the appellant
    from his desire to protect, nurture and care for his children into
    their adult life as he would no longer be in a position to fulfil his
    fatherly role. The independent social worker refers to research setting
    out the most common effects on children who witness the forcible
    removal of the parent including the loss of appetite, sleep changes,
    crying and fear.  Although the emotional changes may reduce over time,
    behavioural symptoms such as withdrawal, anger and aggression persist
    at similar or higher levels of long-term. The independent social worker
    states:


         "It is my view that [JIS] is at risk of experiencing some of these
         emotions since he has the closest relationship with his father.
         This is further compounded by the fact that he has a speech delay
         which leaves him feeling frustrated, unable to express his
         emotions. This manifests itself in aggressive outbursts at times.


         Hence, it is likely that [JIS] will continue to develop and exhibit
         behavioural issues if his father is to leave the UK. His siblings
         are also likely to be affected resulting in abandonment issues.


         It is fair to conclude that [the appellant] has positively
         contributed to his children's lives in the ways mentioned above. It
         also highlights the important role that fathers play in their
         children's lives and should therefore be considered.


         [The appellant's] children are British citizens. However, the fact
         that their father is facing removal from the UK would mean that the
         children are likely to suffer emotionally due to the fact that they
         would no longer have face-to-face contact with his sic father. [JH]
         would also struggle to care for the children alone as she relies on
         the daily support provided by [the appellant]"


40. Again, in expressing an expert opinion, the author has failed to have
    regard to the preserved findings that [JH's] family live in Cornwall
    but there is no credible reason why they cannot help [JH] from time to
    time. The author also entirely disregards the preserved finding that
    there is no credible evidence that the help and support [JH] receives
    from the appellant's family would cease, simply because he is deported.


41. In her submissions before us, Ms Kiai, submitted that the risk of
    suicide is not only relevant to the Article 3 risk that the appellant
    is exposed to, but is also relevant to the assessment of the impact
    that  deportation of the appellant will have upon the appellant's
    children, if they remain in the UK without the appellant.  She submits,
    the appellant will be vulnerable in Jamaica and that will have an
    impact upon the children because there is a significant risk the
    appellant will commit suicide and the children will lose their father.
    We address the Article 3 risk separately, and although we acknowledge
    that prospective suicide by reason of the deportation of the appellant
    is capable of engaging both Articles 3 and 8, to conclude that the risk
    of suicide is such that it would be unduly harsh for the children to
    remain in the UK without the appellant, there would need to be the
    clearest possible evidence of a real and substantial risk that suicide
    would occur, which would not otherwise be preventable by appropriate
    medical supervision having regard to facilities which might reasonably
    be expected to exist in Jamaica.  There is no such evidence before us.


42. Having carefully considered the evidence before us, we are satisfied
    that there is a close bond between the appellant and each of his three
    children, and a particularly strong bond between the appellant and his
    eldest son [JIS].  That is plainly apparent from the report of the
    independent social worker and the evidence of the appellant, and his
    partner.  Despite the current living arrangements, the appellant
    continues to play a positive role in his children's' lives providing
    emotional and physical support whenever he is able to do so.  In her
    witness statement, the appellant's partner sets out the day-to-day
    arrangements for the care of the children and the deportation of the
    appellant will clearly have an impact upon those arrangements.
    However, the impact upon the children, even taking into account the
    health of [JIS] is in our judgment, much the same as the difficulties
    that any young child would face when they are unable to have day to day
    physical contact with a parent.  It is in our judgement clear that [JH]
    has a support network that will be able to assist during any initial
    transitional phase following removal of the appellant. We are quite
    satisfied that the help and support [JH] receives from the appellant's
    family, would continue and she would continue to have the support of
    the church community and the children's godparents, as referred to in
    the report of the independent social worker.


43. We must take into account the Article 8 rights of the appellant, [JH]
    and their children and the public interest in deportation as expressed
    in the immigration rules and s117C of the 2002 Act.  We have carefully
    considered whether there is anything within the evidence and in
    particular, the report of the independent social worker, that
    establishes a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily
    be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent
    reminding ourselves that it is an elevated threshold denoting something
    severe or bleak to be evaluated exclusively from the effect on the
    child.  Having carefully considered the evidence, in our judgment there
    simply is not the evidence on which we can properly conclude that the
    deportation of the appellant would lead to his children suffering a
    degree of harshness beyond what would necessarily be involved for any
    child of a foreign criminal facing deportation. We have no doubt that
    the appellant's children will initially feel a sense of loss because of
    their close relationship with the appellant. We have no doubt that the
    consequences of the appellant's deportation will be harsh.  The
    'commonplace' distress caused by separation from a parent is
    insufficient to meet the test.  The appellant's children will continue
    to receive the love, care and support that they need from their mother
    and the support network they have in the United Kingdom.


44. We accept that reliance upon modern means of communication is no
    substitute for physical presence and face-to-face contact. However, we
    do not believe that in the event of the appellant's deportation,
    contact between the appellant and his children would not be possible,
    albeit it is unlikely to be physical contact.  It would in our
    judgement be entirely possible for the appellant to maintain contact
    with his children via regular communication.  The appellant's
    deportation will undoubtedly mean that [JH] will have to manage three
    young children and it will undoubtedly be difficult for [JH] and the
    appellant's children in the short term, but in our judgment the
    evidence simply does not provide a basis upon which the appellant can
    establish Exception 2 under s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act and paragraph
    399(a) of the Immigration Rules.


45. In NA (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, Lord Justice Jackson
    held that the fall back protection set out in s117C(6) also avails
    those who fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2 and that on a proper
    construction of section 117C(3), the public interest requires the
    person's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies or
    unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  As to the meaning of "very compelling
    circumstances" over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2,
    Lord Justice Jackson said:


         "28. ... The new para. 398 uses the same language as section
         117C(6) . It refers to "very compelling circumstances, over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399
         and 399A of the 2014 rules refer to the same subject matter as
         Exceptions 1 and 2 in section 117C , but they do so in greater
         detail.


         29. In our view, the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in JZ
         (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase used in section
         117C(6) , in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have held is
         to be read into section 117C(3) does not mean that a foreign
         criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from seeking
         to rely on matters falling within the scope of the circumstances
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend that "there
         are very compelling circumstances, over and above those described
         in Exceptions 1 and 2". As we have indicated above, a foreign
         criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would need
         to be able to point to features of his case of a kind mentioned in
         Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A of the 2014 rules),
         or features falling outside the circumstances described in those
         Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made his claim based on
         Article 8 especially strong.


46. Whether there are "very compelling circumstances" is a demanding test,
    but nonetheless requires a wide-ranging assessment, so as to ensure
    that Part 5A produces a result compatible with Article 8.


47. We have noted the appellant's offending history and have set out the
    sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Pillay following the appellant's
    convictions in August 2013.  We note the appellant's sentence of
    imprisonment is at the bottom of the range covered by section 117C(3).
    That however does not undermine the seriousness of his offending
    reflected in the sentencing remarks and the sentence of imprisonment
    imposed.  We also accept the appellant has not had any further
    convictions, but we note he accepted a caution in November 2015 for
    common assault.


48. The best interests of the appellant's children certainly carry weight
    but nevertheless, it is a consequence of criminal conduct that an
    offender may be separated from their children for many years, contrary
    to the best interests of the child.  The desirability of children being
    with both parents is a commonplace of family life. That is not usually
    a sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh the high public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals. As Rafferty LJ observed in
    SSHD -v- CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:


         "Neither the British nationality of the respondent's children nor
         their likely separation from their father for a long time are
         exceptional circumstances which outweigh the public interest in his
         deportation."


49. We acknowledge that the public interest in the deportation of a foreign
    criminal is not set in stone and must be approached flexibly,
    recognising that there will be cases where the person's circumstances
    outweigh the strong public interest in removal.  We have had regard
    inter alia to the appellant's length of residence in the UK, the close
    ties that he retains with his partner and their children, his aunt and
    other members of the family.  We have also had regard to the
    appellant's immigration and offending history, and the family
    circumstances described in the report of the independent social worker.
     However, there are in our judgment no very compelling circumstances
    which make his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.  It follows
    that in our judgement, the deportation of the appellant is in the
    public interest and not disproportionate to the legitimate aim.


Article 3


50. We consider whether the deportation of the appellant would be in breach
    of Article 3 either because of the risk of suicide, or by reason of the
    appellant's mental health and risk of destitution, together.  The
    appellant claims that he would commit suicide if he were returned to
    Jamaica, and/or that he would be destitute and for those reason.  It is
    claimed the decision to deport the appellant would violate his Article
    3 rights.


51. On appeal to the EctHR in N v UK Application 26565/05, a case involving
    HIV, the Grand Chamber upheld the decision of the House of Lords and
    said that in medical cases, Article 3 only applies in very exceptional
    circumstances particularly as the suffering was not the result of an
    intentional act or omission of a State or non-State body. The EctHR
    said that Article 3 could not be relied on to address the disparity in
    medical care between contracting States and the applicant's state of
    origin. The fact that the person's circumstances, including his or her
    life expectancy, would be significantly reduced was not sufficient in
    itself to give rise to a breach of Article 3.  In J v SSHD [2005] EWCA
    Civ 629 the Court of Appeal confirmed that in a foreign case, the
    Article 3 threshold would be particularly high and even higher where
    the alleged inhuman treatment was not the direct or indirect
    responsibility of the public authorities in the receiving state, and
    resulted from some naturally occurring illness whether physical or
    mental.


52. In AXB (Art 3 health: obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT 397,
    the Upper Tribunal considered the implications on the UK of returning a
    person who would commit suicide on return to Jamaica.  The Upper
    Tribunal stated:


         "104.     ... where an individual asserts that he would be at real
         risk of committing suicide, following return to the Receiving
         State, the threshold for establishing Article 3 harm is the high
         threshold described in N v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR 453, unless
         the risk involves hostile actions of the Receiving State towards
         the individual: RA (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2008] EWCA Civ 1210; Y and Z v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 ..."


53. It is now well established that what is required is an assessment of
    the risk at three stages, prior to anticipated removal, during removal
    and on arrival.  We have carefully considered whether the suicide risk
    is such that a removal of the appellant to Jamaica would be in breach
    of Article 3 by reference to the test out out in J -v- SSHD [2005] EWCA
    Civ 629 as clarified in Y and Z [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  We remind
    ourselves that considering whether there are strong grounds for
    believing that the appellant, if removed to Jamaica, faces treatment
    contrary to Article 3, the phrase "real risk" imposes a more stringent
    test than  merely that the risk must be more than "not fanciful".


54. We have carefully considered the medical evidence before us.  In her
    letter of 17th October 2018, Dr Curwen confirms the appellant has been
    receiving support from the North Islington Recovery Team since 2014
    with psychotic depression. She states the appellant's depression is
    caused by the deep-rooted feelings of worthlessness and low self-esteem
    that he has, as a consequence of his immigration status in this
    country. She states the threat of deportation has exacerbated his
    depression and he has required more input from the team and indeed has
    been hospitalised due to his suicide risk.  In her subsequent letters
    dated 1st February 2019 and 15th November 2019, she states the
    appellant has been "under mental health services since 2012" and has a
    diagnosis of Recurrent Depressive Disorder.  She describes the
    appellant to be moderately depressed and states that in the past, he
    has become severely depressed, with psychotic symptoms.  She confirms
    the appellant takes olanzapine 15mg at night and fluoxetine 40mg daily,
    prescribed by his GP but reviewed regularly by the psychiatric team.
    She states:


         "Around the times he has had hearings around his immigration status
         he has become severely depressed. In 2016 he was admitted to the
         Highgate Mental Health Centre under Section 2 of the Mental Health
         Act, as he was having thoughts of hanging himself or throwing
         himself in front of traffic. His suicidal ideas were precipitated
         by feelings of hopelessness after a negative hearing and although
         he had appealed against the decision he was very anxious that he
         would be unsuccessful."


55. In her letter dated 15th November 2019, Dr Curwen states she last
    reviewed the appellant on 9th September 2019, and he remains in low
    mood as a consequence of his precarious situation.  Dr Curwen expresses
    the opinion that if the appellant were to be deported to Jamaica, she
    would be very concerned about his mental health deteriorating
    dramatically. She fears that he would become severely depressed and
    attempt suicide.  She states in her letters of 1st February 2019 and
    15th November 2019:


         "If [the appellant] were returned to Jamaica, there is no reason to
         believe that he would not engage with the medical services if they
         were available for him to access. However, I do not know if the
         medical services he requires exist in Jamaica, and whether they are
         free at the point of delivery. [The appellant] also suffers from
         prostate cancer and is under a urologist at the Whittington
         Hospital. He requires regular monitoring and investigations. I have
         no idea if he would be able to access similar care in Jamaica
         without any money to pay for it.


         If [the appellant] returned to Jamaica there would be a
         deterioration in his condition, as he would be separated from his
         family who love and support him emotionally and financially, and
         somewhere he has no support at all. If [the appellant] were
         deported to Jamaica, he would be at high risk of suicide"


56. Dr Curwen also expresses the opinion that if the appellant were to be
    deported to Jamaica it is likely that he would not be well enough to
    work and as a consequence of his illness, his concentration is poor, at
    times he struggles with his self-care and he struggles with low
    confidence. Dr Curwen states that if he were to be deported to Jamaica
    it is likely that he would be more depressed and would really struggle
    to find work and also remain employed.  She expresses the opinion that
    if the appellant were unable to access appropriate treatment in
    Jamaica, his mental health is likely to deteriorate further. Without
    medication, it is likely that his depression will be more severe, and
    he will experience auditory hallucinations and paranoid delusions. He
    would be at risk of suicide and self-neglect.


57. Dr Alicia Griffiths met with the appellant at the offices of his
    representatives on 30th January 2020 for 2 hours.  She asked the
    appellant if he had thought of any plans or means to end his.  He is
    recorded to have said:


         "I would just have to find a way; I could never live without them
         [my children]. They are the main reason, if I have a smile on my
         face, is down to my children and [JH]. I can't see nothing
         sometimes, but they make me so happy. Without them, I have nothing,
         no reason to smile."


58. Dr Griffiths states that having read both of Dr Curwen's reports dated
    1st February 2019 and 15th November 2019, she agrees with her findings
    and diagnosis of the appellant's presenting difficulties. She believes
    the appellant meets the full diagnostic criteria for Recurrent Major
    Depressive Disorder and she agrees with Dr Curwen that the appellant's
    mental health is closely associated with his fears around being
    deported from the UK and the worries he has about being separated from
    his family.  Dr Griffiths confirms in her report that the diagnosis is
    made on the basis of her clinical observations and not purely the
    appellant's description of his symptoms. She is confident that she is
    able to differentiate those presenting with clinical presentations of
    depression and psychosis, and those who are not.


59. In her opinion, the appellant's mental health is likely to deteriorate
    further should he be deported to Jamaica. She believes the appellant
    would benefit from specialist psychological therapy and to achieve the
    maximum benefit from therapy, he should feel a sense of safety and
    being able to stay in the UK without the threat of removal.  At
    paragraph 5.7 of her report, she states that leaving his partner and
    three children would be devastating to the appellant as they are his
    biggest support systems and his only reported purpose for staying
    alive. She believes the risk of the appellant ending his life is likely
    to increase significantly if he is deported to Jamaica and the
    appellant has described a clear intention to end his life should he be
    deported.


60. Dr Griffiths confirms at section 5.9 of her report that the appellant
    currently, has no thoughts or intention of ending his life. She states,
    ".. However, he did endorse the risk item relating to current suicidal
    thoughts or plans and described experiencing 'thoughts that I would be
    better off dead, or of hurting myself in some way' nearly every day for
    the past two weeks".  She believes the appellant's intention to act on
    suicidal ideation appear reactive to the decision regarding his
    immigration status.  She notes, at section 5.13, that the appellant
    described that his risk of suicide would "definitely increase" if he
    was deported because he would be separated from his partner and his
    three children. He described that he would end his life if he was
    deported. She states he did not disclose a clear plan about how he
    would end his life but told her he would "have to find a way".  She
    expresses the opinion that due to his history the appellant's suicidal
    ideation should be taken seriously. He is not currently actively
    suicidal although he does experience thoughts of ending his life
    frequently. She states that although the appellant might not currently
    be at risk, this could easily change if he felt overwhelmed or more
    helpless regarding his future circumstances.  She believes that his
    suicide risk when served with removal directions and when in transit,
    and on arrival in Jamaica is very high.


61. We do not consider the medical evidence, taken at its highest,
    demonstrates a real risk that the appellant would commit suicide in the
    UK.  We accept the appellant's mental health is very closely associated
    with his fears around being deported from the UK and the worries he has
    about being separated from his family.  In 2016, he was admitted to the
    Highgate Mental Health Centre under s2 Mental Health Act as he was
    having thoughts of hanging himself or throwing himself in front of
    traffic.  He has been diagnosed with Recurrent Major Depressive
    Disorder that is directly attributable to his reports of preoccupation,
    worry and uncertainty around his future.  The appellant receives
    support from his partner and the presence of his children is of
    significant comfort to him. Dr Griffiths confirms the appellant is not
    currently actively suicidal, although he does experience thoughts of
    ending his life frequently.  She states that although he might not
    currently be at imminent risk, this could easily change if he felt
    overwhelmed or helpless regarding his future circumstances. The
    appellant is receiving support and cooperates with the medical
    authorities in the UK. When precautionary steps have had to be taken,
    those steps have been taken and we find that any risk upon the
    appellant learning of  any decision to remove him would be adequately
    managed in the UK by the relevant authorities.  There is no evidence
    before us of any attempt at self-harm or suicide following the decision
    of the 'error of law' decision.  Any risk that manifests itself during
    removal, is capable of being managed by the respondent and the support
    that the appellant will undoubtedly receive from his partner, and his
    family in the UK.


62. We therefore approach our assessment on the basis that it would be
    possible for the respondent to return the appellant to Jamaica without
    his coming to harm, but once there, he would be in the hands of the
    mental health services in Jamaica. In this context, the Article 3
    threshold is particularly high. The risk here, results from a naturally
    occurring illness.  We acknowledge that an Article 3 claim, can in
    principle succeed, in a suicide case.


63. There is a preserved finding that there is no credible evidence that
    the appellant does not have extended family in Jamaica that could help
    him settle in Jamaica.  At paragraph 5.8 of her report, Dr Griffiths
    expresses the opinion that the appellant would struggle to be able to
    fully access appropriate medical treatment in Jamaica. She states:


         "... Firstly, [the appellant] explicitly told me that he would be
         homeless if returned to Jamaica. He described that people who are
         unwell are left to be homeless. He described that he did not think
         there was support or care for people like himself in Jamaica. When
         I asked him explicitly about support he told me he did not know
         about mental health services in Jamaica.


         [The appellant] also describe little support in Jamaica from any
         family. His family in the UK currently remind him of his
         appointments for medical services, which helps him to engage with
         these. Without this, I believe that [the appellant] would find it
         extremely challenging to engage with medical services. When asked
         about appointments he told me "[JH] writes them down", [JH] reminds
         me". Thus, he is heavily reliant on others to remind him of medical
         appointments. I believe that his ability to access appropriate
         medical services and psychological support for his symptoms would
         be difficult for him. Firstly, he was not able to articulate any
         knowledge of how he might go about receiving such support. Being in
         Jamaica is also likely to exacerbate symptoms of low mood and
         potential auditory hallucinations. Therefore, as his symptoms are
         likely to worsen, it would be even harder for him to access
         treatment. He also did not tell me about his prostate cancer,
         meaning that he might not always fully remember or be clear of the
         treatment he is receiving, and he requires. Without anyone
         overseeing his care, it seems unlikely that the kind of support
         that may be available to him in the UK would be provided."


64. Dr Curwen expresses the opinion that if the appellant were returned to
    Jamaica, there is no reason to believe that he would not engage with
    the medical services if they were available for him to have access to.
    Dr Griffiths expresses the opinion that the applicant's mental health
    is likely to deteriorate further should he be deported to Jamaica and
    the appellant would struggle to be able to fully access appropriate
    medical treatment in Jamaica.  Miss Kiai submits we should prefer the
    opinion expressed by Dr Griffiths, because it is reasoned.  We have
    carefully considered the reasons that she gives. She states the
    appellant told her that he would be homeless if he returned to Jamaica,
    and he did not think there was support or care for people like himself
    in Jamaica. The appellant also described that he would have little
    support in Jamaica from any family and without the assistance he
    currently has,  Dr Griffiths believes the appellant would find it
    extremely challenging to engage with medical services. He is heavily
    reliant on others to remind him of medical appointments and she
    believes that his ability to access appropriate medical services and
    psychological support for his symptoms, would be difficult for him. In
    our judgement, the difficulty with that reasoning is that Dr Griffiths
    'opinion is based upon what she had been told by the appellant himself.
    In her report, she identifies, at section 1.3, that she was provided
    with a copy of the error of law determination promulgated on 18th
    October 2019.  In reaching her opinion and setting out her reasons, she
    disregards entirely the preserved finding that there is no credible
    evidence that the appellant does not have extended family in Jamaica
    that could help him to settle in Jamaica. In our judgement, treatment
    would be available to the appellant and with the availability of family
    support, the reasons given by Dr Griffiths fall away.   We find the
    opinion expressed by Dr Curwen to be correct. If returned to Jamaica,
    there is no reason to believe that the appellant would not engage with
    the medical services available for him.


65. At paragraph 5.9 of her report Dr Griffith confirms that she is unable
    to comment fully on whether the medical services the appellant
    requires, exist in Jamaica.  She believes that an important issue is
    the appellant's ability to access such treatment.  She believes that if
    the medical services are available as they are in the UK, without his
    family to remind him of appointments, and with being isolated and
    alone, the appellant would significantly struggle to engage with much-
    needed medical services.


66. There is scant evidence before us regarding the availability of
    treatment for mental health in Jamaica. We have considered the content
    of the World Health Organization Assessment Instrument for mental
    health systems in Jamaica - 2009, that is in the appellant's bundle.
    The report confirms that the mental health service is divided into
    national and regional health authorities. Mental health is integrated
    into general health care with all regions having most of the essential
    mental health components and  psychotropic medication. The report
    confirms that in Jamaica, epidemiological studies show that the most
    prevalent disorder is that of Major Depressive Disorder. The 2009
    report confirms that mental health education and promotion is a stated
    priority for both the national and regional authorities. The report
    confirms that during the last two years (i.e. 2007/8 or 2008/9) there
    had been an active mental health promotion targeting all sectors.


67. The appellant relies upon a generic report by Dr Luke de Noronha which
    is said to offer accurate and balanced country information regarding
    deportees in Jamaica. We have also been provided with a letter from Dr
    Luke de Noronha dated 11th February 2019.  The author candidly accepts
    that he is not qualified to speak confidently on mental health
    provision in Jamaica but makes the bold assertion that the appellant
    will not be able to receive the same level of mental health support as
    he does in the UK.  Without any qualification to do so, he expresses an
    opinion that it is likely the appellant's condition will worsen, and
    suggests the appellant clearly demonstrates risks above and beyond most
    cases. The report makes a number of very general claims, and we attach
    little weight to the opinions expressed


68. When pressed regarding the availability of treatment in Jamaica, Miss
    Kiai referred us to an article, that appears at page 811 of the
    appellant's bundle, dated 4th September 2017 headed 'Jamaica's
    healthcare system in dire need of help', published on a website;
    'www.caribbeannationalweekly.com'.  The author of the article and their
    credentials is not identified.  The article states "Jamaicans in the
    Diaspora seems (sic) to be perennially concerned about the reported
    violent crime rate in Jamaica. While this may be justified, it is
    ironic when one visits Jamaica one finds the general public going about
    their business, enjoying life, as if there is really "no problem" on
    the island. However, there is a problem in Jamaica that is just as
    concerning as the reported crime rate. This problem relates to
    Jamaica's healthcare system. Healthcare in Jamaica is one area that is
    not keeping up with the strides the nation has accomplished since
    independence in 1962".  The article states the main problem is the
    existing medical infrastructure has outgrown its efficiency to the
    expanding and ageing population. It is said that the root of the
    problem of the inefficiencies of the public health facilities, is cost.


69. In the respondent's decision of 17th October 2018 the respondent
    acknowledges that medical facilities in Jamaica may not be of the same
    standard as those in the UK, but the respondent does not consider that
    the level of care is such that the appellant's removal to Jamaica would
    result in a breach of Article 3.  The respondent refers to psychiatric
    treatment on an inpatient or outpatient basis being available at the
    Bellevue Hospital, a public facility, in Kingston.  It is said the
    hospital also provides rehabilitative and re-integrative services to
    patients and employs psychiatric social workers. The University
    Hospital of the West Indies in Kingston is also said to provide mental
    health services, including psychiatry.  It is said that under the
    National Health Fund JADEP programme, people aged over 60 can obtain
    medicines for psychiatric conditions free of charge.


70. As we have already said, any risk that manifests itself during removal
    itself, is capable of being managed by the respondent and the support
    that the appellant will undoubtedly receive from his partner, and his
    family in the UK.  Having considered all the evidence we are quite
    satisfied that medical treatment and assistance would be available to
    the appellant in Jamaica, albeit not to the standard available in the
    UK. The appellant is a Jamaican citizen and would have access to such
    services including medical and mental health provision.  The 'suicide
    risk' is not in our judgement such that the removal of the appellant to
    Jamaica would be in breach of Article 3.


71. As to the general Article 3 claim and the claim that the appellant
    would face destitution, we note Dr Griffiths states she is not sure if
    the appellant would be well enough (or able) to work in Jamaica. The
    appellant described to her that he would be vulnerable to facing
    nothing other than destitution in Jamaica. She believes the appellant
    might struggle within a working environment if he is deported to
    Jamaica and his low mood and hopelessness has increased.


72. Our attention was drawn by Miss Kiai to an article by Tanya Golash-Boza
    regarding 'transnational coping strategies and gendered stigma among
    Jamaican deportees.  The focus of that report is why deportees engage
    in transnational practices as coping strategies to deal with financial
    and emotional hardship, and the consequences that flow.  Our attention
    was also drawn to a paper by Christopher Charles, published on 9th
    October 2010 regarding the reintegration of deportees in Jamaica.


73. The appellant has previously worked in the UK and would have some
    familial support in Jamaica.  We have had regard to the report of Mr De
    Noronha, regarding the situation for deportees in Jamaica.  We are
    unable to find that the appellant would be destitute or homeless in
    Jamaica albeit it might take him some time to find employment. He is
    currently supported financially by his partner and his aunt in the UK,
    and we find that they would give him some financial assistance on his
    return, at least in the short term until he finds a means of supporting
    himself, albeit we appreciate, they are likely to have little income to
    spare at the moment.  We accept there are parts of Jamaica where crime
    is at high levels, but the appellant would be able to relocate to safer
    areas. We have already found the medical treatment and social services
    would be available to the appellant in Jamaica.  Although we accept
    that difficult conditions pertain in Jamaica, they do not reach the
    high threshold to enable the appellant's appeal to succeed on Article 3
    grounds.


74. In our final analysis, we find the appellant's and his partner's and
    children's' protected rights, whether considered collectively or
    individually, are not in our judgement such as to outweigh the public
    interest in the appellant's deportation.


75. It follows that we dismiss the appeal.


Decision


76. The appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                           Date 13th March 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




