
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12426/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 20 April 2018                      |On 08 May 2018                         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    [M A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Junior, Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with leave against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley dismissing his appeal against the  decision  of
    the respondent refusing to grant him asylum in the United  Kingdom  and
    the decision to move him from the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1982.

3.   He claims to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1995  with  his
    parents.  A few days later, he lost his parents but was discovered by a
    Mr [U] and Ms [K].  He remained with  them  and  referred  to  them  as
    grandparents.  Mr [U] died in January 2007.

4.   The appellant's asylum claim was based  on  imputed  political  opinion
    and religious grounds.

5.   The judge concluded that the appellant was not  a  genuine  refugee  in
    need of international  protection.   He  found  that  his  evidence  on
    material matters lacked credibility.

6.   In relation to his claimed religious conversion, the judge  found  that
    the appellant provided materially inconsistent evidence on core issues.

7.   At the hearing before me  Mr  Junior  said  he  was  not  pursuing  the
    grounds against the judge's findings on these matters but not  resiling
    from those grounds either.

8.   He then went on to say that the  only  issue  in  this  appeal  was  in
    respect of the appellant's appeal under Article 8.

9.   In the light of the submissions made by Mr  Junior,  I  find  that  the
    judge fully considered the appellant's reasons for claiming  asylum  on
    grounds of political opinion and on  religious  grounds.   The  judge's
    findings on those core issues  were  properly  reasoned  and  adequate.
    Accordingly, the judge's decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim on the two matters raised by the appellant shall stand.

10.  Mr Junior sought to pursue the  appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8.
    The judge's findings in respect of the appellant's appeal under Article
    8 were very brief.  The judge found at paragraph 52 that the  appellant
    has not engaged Article 8 right to family or private life in the United
    Kingdom when considering either the provisions of Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules, or the established principles set out in Razgar.

11.  The judge found that the appellant has no family  in  the  UK  and  any
    right to private life that he may have acquired  was  done  so  in  the
    knowledge that the appellant had never been given any leave  to  remain
    in the UK at any time.  He found that the appellant has shown a blatant
    disregard for proper immigration control in the UK.

12.  The judge at paragraph 53 found that the appellant has resided  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully over a  number  of  years  and  he  has  made
    previous applications to remain in the United  Kingdom,  all  of  which
    have been refused.  He has an adverse immigration history in the United
    Kingdom.  The judge found that the appellant has pursued  a  fabricated
    claim for international protection which lacked basic credibility.   He
    said  the  appellant  has  shown   considerable   resourcefulness   and
    independence by living in the United Kingdom over a  number  of  years.
    Removal would not give rise to a breach of  any  Article  8  rights  in
    relation to either family  or  private  life  interests.   Any  medical
    issues the appellant has can be properly treated  in  Bangladesh.   Nor
    was there any supporting medical evidence which suggests that any  such
    treatment or medication that the appellant requires is  unavailable  in
    Bangladesh.

13.  At the hearing before me I questioned whether it was  accepted  by  the
    respondent or the judge that the appellant did  indeed  arrive  in  the
    United Kingdom in 1995 as claimed by him.

14.  Mr Bramble submitted that the Secretary of State  at  page  17  of  her
    Reasons for Refusal Letter, second paragraph, considered  that  if  the
    appellant had been residing in the UK since 1995, he  would  have  been
    able to provide the documentary evidence to support this claim  in  the
    form of medical information, banks, utility bills,  council  tax  bills
    etc.  In support of his  claimed  length  of  residency  the  appellant
    provided a statement from Ms [K] which stated that he  has  lived  with
    her since the  appellant  was  found  by  her  husband  in  1995.   The
    Secretary of State considered that this statement  was  in  itself  not
    sufficient evidence that the appellant has  been  residing  in  the  UK
    since his claimed entry in 1995.  Mr Bramble submitted that it  can  be
    gleaned from the concerns the Secretary of State had in light  of  this
    evidence that the Secretary of State did not accept that the  appellant
    entered the UK in 1995.  In any event there was no evidence to  support
    this claim.

15.  Mr Bramble submitted that the twenty years'  requirement  in  paragraph
    276ADE goes to the date of application and  backwards.   Therefore,  we
    are looking at a period from 31 August 2017 when the appellant made the
    application to August 1997.

16.  Mr Junior accepted that there was  no  documentary  evidence  or  other
    evidence to support the appellant's claim that he arrived in the UK  in
    1995.  However, he argued that the judge appeared to  accept  that  the
    appellant arrived in the UK in 1995 because of what the judge  said  at
    paragraph 37.  The judge said this:

         "I do not  find  it  credible  that  the  appellant,  after  having
         recently arrived in the United Kingdom in 1995, and having lost his
         parents in the UK whilst shopping, would have been  merely  content
         to have been effectively adopted by a Bangladeshi couple with  whom
         he would continue to reside for several years in the UK, without at
         any stage seeking a request for the couple to seek  to  locate  his
         parents."

17.  Mr Junior submitted further that at paragraph 53  the  judge's  finding
    that the appellant has resided in the United Kingdom unlawfully over  a
    number of  years  suggests  that  the  judge  was  accepting  that  the
    appellant has been in the UK since 1995.

18.  I was not persuaded by  Mr  Junior's  submissions.   The  Secretary  of
    State specifically raised her concerns with regard to  the  appellant's
    claim that he arrived in the UK in 1995. The respondent considered that
    the letter from Mrs [K] was insufficient  to  support  the  appellant's
    claim. I find that the appellant has not sought up till now  to  submit
    documentary or other evidence to support his claim.  The  small  bundle
    of documents he submitted in support of the appeal included  a  witness
    statement from the appellant of six pages.  It was only in paragraph  7
    that the appellant claimed that his parents brought him to  the  UK  in
    1995.  The rest of the statement was devoted to his claims  in  respect
    of  his  asylum  application.   The  bundle  contained  no  documentary
    evidence to support his claim that he arrived in the  UK  in  1995.   I
    find that the judge's assertions at paragraphs 37 and 53 do not  amount
    to an acceptance by him of the appellant's evidence that he arrived  in
    the UK in 1995.

19.  In any event, with regard to his private life, the  appellant  has  not
    submitted any evidence and did not do so before the judge  as  to  what
    sort of private life he has had for the however many years he has  been
    in the UK.  I find that the judge was right to say that  the  appellant
    has resided in the UK unlawfully over a number of years and he has made
    previous applications to remain in the United  Kingdom,  all  of  which
    have been refused.  I have no evidence before me as to the  quality  of
    his private life over the years in the UK.   In  the  absence  of  such
    evidence, it cannot be properly argued that the judge erred in  law  in
    his findings in respect of the appellant's appeal under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

20.  Accordingly, the judge's decision shall stand.

21.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  1 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun





