
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12197/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 August 2017                        |On 08 September 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Williams, instructed by Asylum Justice


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or court directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the respondent ("HAK").  This direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State,  I  will  for
    convenience refer to the parties as they appeared before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on [  ]  1991.   She
    left Somalia in 2007 and travelled to Kenya.  In 2008, she  left  Kenya
    arriving in Switzerland in October 2008.  There, she  met  her  husband
    and their marriage was registered in Switzerland  in  2012.   They  now
    have three children.  The appellant's husband is a  citizen  of  Italy.
    The appellant came to the United Kingdom in April 2014 and subsequently
    applied for an EEA residence card as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national,
    namely her husband.  That residence card was granted by  the  Secretary
    of State on 17 December 2014 valid  until  17  December  2019.   On  18
    November 2015, she returned to Switzerland where she remained until the
    Swiss authorities returned her and her three children to the UK  on  19
    April 2016.  On that date, the appellant claimed asylum.

 4. On 18 October 2016, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.
     Although the Secretary of State accepted that the appellant could  not
    safely return to Somalia,  she  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  a
    citizen of Italy where she could reside.

 5. The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Frazer
    concluded that the appellant was not a citizen of  Italy  although  she
    could seek to apply for citizenship  based  upon  her  marriage  to  an
    Italian citizen.  Given the Secretary of State's  acceptance  that  the
    appellant was at risk on return to Somalia, Judge  Frazer  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that, in finding that the appellant  was  not  an
    Italian citizen, the judge had failed to have regard to the  fact  that
    the appellant had not taken all reasonable steps to ascertain  "whether
    she has the disputed right of entry/residence".  Reliance was placed on
    the cases of MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 289 and KK and Others
    [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC).

 7. On 17 May 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Grant-Hutchison) granted
    the Secretary of  State  permission  to  appeal.   The  basis  of  that
    permission  is  set  out  in  paragraph  2  of  the  decision  granting
    permission as follows:

         "It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected himself  by  failing
         to consider in terms of MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ  289
         and KK & Others v SSHD [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC) whether  the  Appellant
         has taken all reasonable steps to ascertain  whether  she  has  the
         disputed right of entry or residence to  enter  Italy.   Her  minor
         children are Italian nationals.   She  is  married  to  an  Italian
         national even though she is separated and he is presently serving a
         prison sentence."

Discussion

 8. The point at issue in this appeal is whether the judge was entitled  to
    find that the appellant was not an  Italian  citizen.   If  she  is  an
    Italian citizen, of course, then her refugee claim fails as one of  her
    countries of nationality is safe and likewise she is  not  at  risk  of
    treatment contrary to Art 3 as she will not be removed to Somalia.  The
    issue is not whether the appellant can reside in Italy; it is solely  a
    question of whether she holds Italian citizenship.

 9. In KK, the Upper Tribunal distinguished  between  three  categories  of
    case where an individual's nationality was in issue for the purposes of
    the Refugee Convention.  In paragraph 1 of the head note  the  Tribunal
    said this:

         "1.  Law

             (a)  For the purposes of determining whether a person is  "of"
                  or "has" a nationality within the meaning of Article 1A(2)
                  of the Refugee Convention, it is convenient to distinguish
                  between cases where a person  (i)  is  (already)  of  that
                  nationality; (ii)  is  not  of  that  nationality  but  is
                  entitled  to  acquire  it;  and  (iii)  is  not  of   that
                  nationality but may be able to acquire it.

             (b)  Cases within (i) and (ii) are cases where the  person  is
                  "of" or "has" the nationality in  question;  cases  within
                  (iii) are not.

             (c)   For  the  purposes  there  is  no  separate  concept  of
                  "effective" nationality; the issue is the availability  of
                  protection in the country in question.

             (d)  Nationality of any State is a  matter  for  that  State's
                  law, constitution and  (to  a  limited  extent)  practice,
                  proof of any of which is by evidence,  the  assessment  of
                  which is for the court deciding the protection claim.

             (e)  As eligibility for Refugee Convention protection is not a
                  matter of choice, evidence  going  to  a  person's  status
                  within cases (i) and (ii) has  to  be  on  "best  efforts"
                  basis, and evidence  of  the  attitude  of  the  State  in
                  question to a person  who  seeks  reasons  for  not  being
                  removed to that State may be of very limited relevance."

10.  In  other  words,  where  an  individual  already  has  a   particular
    nationality or is entitled to acquire it, then for the purposes of  the
    Refugee Convention they have that nationality and, if safe within  that
    country, they cannot be a refugee despite  being  at  risk  in  another
    country of which they are also  a  national.   By  contrast,  where  an
    individual may be able to acquire nationality, they  do  not  presently
    hold that nationality and so it  is  irrelevant  for  the  purposes  of
    determining whether they are outside their country of nationality  with
    a well-founded fear of persecution.

11. In her determination, Judge Frazer concluded that  the  appellant  fell
    within category (iii) and thus her  only  country  of  nationality  was
    Somalia.

12. At para 19, Judge Frazer set out an extract from the  relevant  Italian
    citizenship law.  Before me,  both  Mr  Diwnycz,  who  represented  the
    Secretary of State and  Ms  Williams,  who  represented  the  appellant
    (neither of whom appeared in  the  First-tier  Tribunal),  acknowledged
    that the judge had been entitled to look up the relevant law  in  Italy
    by reference to the footnote cited in the refusal letter.

13. At para 20, the judge said this:

         "20. The Appellant did not make any attempt to obtain her residence
             rights in Italy prior to the hearing.  I find that  she  falls
             within category (iii) of KK in that she is not Italian but may
             be entitled to acquire it.  She may  be  legally  married  but
             there is an issue about the permanency of her marriage bond in
             view of her expressed intention to having nothing to  do  with
             her husband and on account of his incarceration.  Her children
             will be Italian nationals.  In all likelihood she would derive
             a right of residence in Italy on account of her  parentage  of
             them; however, in the circumstances this is not  a  certainty,
             and it is not known what sort of right that would be: it would
             not necessarily be an entitlement to nationality."

14. Then, having cited from MA (Ethiopia) and KK, the  judge  continued  at
    paras 22-23 as follows:

         "22. The Appellant's children are entitled to  Italian  nationality
             on  account  of  their  parentage.   In  all  likelihood   the
             Appellant will have a derivative right as their sole carer but
             not necessarily an entitlement  to  Italian  nationality.   In
             terms of her own status as a spouse of  an  Italian  national,
             there may be some  issue  concerning  the  permanency  of  her
             marriage  which  could  vitiate  her  entitlement  to  Italian
             nationality through her  relationship  with  her  spouse.   In
             either case, there may be suitability requirements and as  Mr.
             Rees has pointed out, there may  be  suitability  requirements
             which  will  not  be  fulfilled  because  of   the   husband's
             criminality.

         23.  The Appellant has  not  made  any  enquiries  of  the  Italian
             embassy as to her entitlement or her children's entitlement to
             Italian nationality.  However the question, it seems,  is  not
             clear cut.  There is no evidence before me that she will  have
             an automatic entitlement to Italian nationality on account  of
             her status as the children's sole  carer.   She  may  have  an
             entitlement  through  marriage  but  the  permanency  of  that
             relationship is in issue, so there is no  definite  answer  to
             whether she will acquire it in that way.  Taking into  account
             the  dicta  at  paragraph  83  of  KK,   notwithstanding   the
             Appellant's failure to make enquiries of the  Italian  embassy
             about her status, I find that she is not an  Italian  national
             or has a  de  facto  entitlement  to  nationality.   In  those
             circumstances she is in the United Kingdom and is at real risk
             of persecution for a Convention reason, as has  been  accepted
             by the Respondent in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   The
             United Kingdom must therefore honour its obligations under the
             Refugee Convention.  I allow the appeal."

15. The Secretary of State's grounds, in effect,  contend  that  the  judge
    erred in law by failing to take into account that the appellant had not
    sought to determine from the Italian authorities  whether  she  was  an
    Italian citizen.  Leaving aside, the irrelevant issue of residence, the
    judge had before her evidence that the appellant could apply and  might
    acquire Italian  citizenship  based  upon  her  relationship  with  her
    husband.  But that was not because she already was an  Italian  citizen
    (KK category (i)) or  because  she  was  entitled  to  acquire  it  (KK
    category  (ii)).   It  was  because  if  she  satisfied  the   relevant
    requirements (including three years or perhaps one and  a  half  years'
    residence in the UK as her husband's spouse), she could apply and might
    acquire Italian citizenship.  That, as the judge  found,  falls  within
    category (iii) of KK.

16. The judge was alive to the argument that the  appellant  had  not  made
    enquiries of the Italian embassy as to her status.  However,  that  is,
    in truth, no more than a matter of evidence (see MA (Ethiopia) at  [50]
    and KK at [83]).  It is not a legal requirement.  Here, the  judge  had
    the full text of the Italian  citizenship  provisions.   What  was  the
    applicable Italian law was a question of fact based upon the  evidence.
    It was, in my judgment, properly open to the judge to conclude that the
    appellant was not now an Italian citizen nor did she have the right  to
    acquire it.   As  the  judge  noted,  the  law  is  hedged  about  with
    conditions and the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  not  all  these
    conditions were established on  the  evidence.   Whilst  the  appellant
    could make a claim to citizenship, this was not a case where she had an
    established right to that citizenship.  The fact that the appellant had
    not approached the Italian embassy was not determinative.  The terms of
    Italian law were clearly before the judge and the judge's  findings  in
    relation to the surrounding circumstances, which  Mr  Diwnycz  accepted
    could not be successfully challenged, entitled the  judge  to  conclude
    that the appellant had established that she was not an Italian  citizen
    or was entitled to acquire it.

17. In my judgment, that finding is legally unassailable and  determinative
    of the appeal in the appellant's favour given the Secretary of  State's
    concession that she would not be safe on return to Somalia.

    Decision

18. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum and Art 8  grounds  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision stands.

19. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.




                                                                      Signed

                                                     [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            7 September 2017
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



                                                                      Signed

                                                          [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            7 September 2017


