
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12187/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 1 June 2020                       |
|Extempore                            |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     L B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McTaggart instructed by R P Crawford & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gillespie  promulgated  on  2  July  2019  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's protection appeal which was an appeal against
    a decision of the respondent made in September 2018.

 2. The appellant's case is that she is at risk on return to the Democratic
    Republic of Congo where she worked  as  a  doctor  and  where  she  had
    suffered significant and serious abuse on account of  actual  perceived
    political opinions.  The facts are  set  out  in  some  detail  in  the
    refusal letter and in the decision; there is no need to  rehearse  them
    here.

 3. The thrust of the challenge to the decision is that Judge Gillespie did
    not accept that the appellant was credible for  a  number  of  reasons;
    primarily, as is  challenged  in  the  grounds,  that  she  would  have
    disclosed earlier that she had been raped.   Judge  Gillespie  did  not
    accept the other incidents which were said to have occurred after  that
    primarily [41] because he had rejected the account of the first part.

 4. Permission was granted by Judge Hollingworth on 22 August 2019.

 5. I am satisfied that Judge Gillespie erred in his approach to  the  part
    of the appellant's claim that she had been raped in two different ways.
     First, there appears to have been no proper reference  to  the  gender
    guidelines, no attempt to consider that there  might  have  been  other
    reasons why she did not disclose  it  and  just  as  importantly  Judge
    Gillespie did not raise this issue with parties during the hearing.  As
    Mr McTaggart submitted, it was not part of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    case that this delay damaged the appellant's credibility.

 6. I conclude also that this error was clearly material as it features not
    only in his dismissal of the first part of the  appellant's  claim  but
    also he uses it from paragraph 41 onwards as a reason  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's account of what happened after that which  was  equally  of
    importance to her claim.

 7. For these reasons I am satisfied there was a procedural error amounting
    to a material error of law in this case and on  that  basis  alone  the
    decision needs to be set aside  and  given  the  nature  of  the  error
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. For the  sake  of  completeness,  I  consider  it  necessary  to  reach
    conclusions about Judge Gillespie's approach  to  fact-finding.   There
    are two factors to which my attention was drawn where  Judge  Gillespie
    appears to have abdicated his responsibility to make findings of  fact.
    At paragraph [38] he refers to the Secretary of State's conclusions  as
    "sustainable". Judge Gillespie was not considering an  application  for
    judicial review. This is an appeal on the facts; it is not the  judge's
    role simply to review the  respondent's  conclusions.  What  the  Judge
    Gillespie should have done is to make  findings;  he  did  not  do  so.
    Similarly, at paragraph [63] Judge Gillespie made the same error.

 9. Judge Gillespie's handling of the expert evidence of Dr  Kane  is  also
    flawed.  It is simply not clear from what Judge Gillespie wrote what he
    accepts and what he did not.  It is  unclear  whether  he  accepts  the
    appellant has been diagnosed with PTSD or not.

10. Any one of these errors is sufficiently serious to amount to a material
    error which would have caused this decision to be  set  aside  and  for
    these reasons as I have already said the decision  is  set  aside.  The
    effect, cumulatively, of the errors is such that the appellant did  not
    receive a fair hearing, and so the appeal is  to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal as it will be necessary to make fresh  findings  on
    all issues; none of the findings can be preserved.

11. I will also in this case make an anonymity order.  I am  frankly  at  a
    loss to understand how the First-tier Tribunal could not have  made  an
    anonymity order in this case.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
    to be made on all issues on the issue of dependency between the
    appellant and the sponsor. (amended pursuant to rule 42, Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008)



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 18 December 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

