
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12117/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th March 2019                   |On 12th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NKT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. G Patel.  Counsel instructed by Bolton
Citizens Advice Bureau


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) judge did not make an anonymity order.
       Although no application is made before me, the appeal concerns a
      claim for asylum and international protection and in my judgement, it
      is appropriate for an anonymity order to be made under Rule 14 of the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  NKT is granted
      anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction applies
      both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with
      this direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
      court.


   2. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department and the respondent to this appeal is NKT.  However
      for ease of reference, in the course of  this  determination  I  shall
      adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I shall  in  this
      determination, refer to NKT as the appellant,  and  the  Secretary  of
      State as the respondent.


   3. The respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      ("FtT") Judge Siddiqi promulgated on 28th November 2018, allowing the
      appellant's appeal on Article 2, 3, and humanitarian protection
      grounds.


   4. The background to the appellant's claim is summarised at paragraphs
      [15(a)] to [15(h)] of the decision of the FtT Judge.  I do not repeat
      that background in this decision, but broadly stated the appellant
      relies upon events that he claims occurred, whilst he was living in
      Iraq between May and August 2015, when he was introduced to a woman,
      SB, by a member of a group linked to Daesh.  At paragraph [15(h)], the
      FtT Judge summarises the appellant's fear as follows:


         "The appellant avers that he has a well-founded fear of persecution
         from the group linked to Daesh because he reported them to Asayish.
         He also avers that he is at risk of serious harm from the brother
         of Ms SB's ex-husband as the appellant entered into a relationship
         with Ms SB against the wishes of her ex-husband's family."


   5.  The Judge's findings of fact and conclusions are set out at
      paragraphs [21] to [36] of the decision. Having heard the evidence,
      the FtT Judge rejected the appellant's account of the events that led
      to his leaving Iraq.  The FtT Judge found that the appellant had been
      inconsistent as to his marital status, and his evidence regarding his
      relationship with Ms SB was generally vague.  The appellant was unable
      to provide any detail regarding Ms SB's child from her previous
      marriage and he has a very poor knowledge of someone he claims to have
      been married to. He was unable to provide any details of the tribe
      that Ms SB belongs to, despite referring in his witness statement to
      the importance of tribal traditions.  The Judge noted that the
      background material refers to Kurdish marriage arrangements being very
      complex, and defined by tribal traditions, and describing marriage as
      one of the most important events for establishing alliances and
      creating social hierarchies within, and between tribes.  At paragraph
      [24], the FtT Judge states:


         "Having considered the evidence before me in the round, I am not
         persuaded that the appellant married Ms SB. As a result, it follows
         that I am not satisfied that [A] obtained videos of the appellant
         with Ms SB and threatened him as a result."


   6. At paragraph [28], the Judge states:


         "I must consider the evidence and the round and in doing so I apply
         the lower standard of proof. There is very little about the
         appellant's evidence that I find to be credible. I am not persuaded
         that he entered into relationship with Ms SB. I am not persuaded
         that he would become friends with [A] and a group linked to Daesh,
         knowing the risks of this. I am not persuaded that he was
         threatened or shot at by that group. As I am not persuaded that he
         entered into a relationship with Ms SB, it follows that I am not
         persuaded that he is at any risk from the family of her ex-
         husband.".


   7. Having rejected the appellant's account of events, the Judge found, at
      [29], that the appellant has not established that he would be at risk
      of persecution on the grounds of his political opinion or membership
      of a particular social group.  The Judge went on to consider the claim
      for humanitarian protection and on ECHR grounds, by reference to the
      Country guidance set out in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544
      (IAC) and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212
      (IAC), in particular.


   8. At paragraph [33] of his decision, the Judge notes that the respondent
      does not dispute that the appellant comes from Kirkuk.  The respondent
      had invited the FtT Judge to depart from the guidance set out in AA
      that the intensity of the conflict in the so-called "contested areas"
      comprising, inter alia, Kirkuk, is such that as a general matter,
      there are substantial grounds for believing that any civilian returned
      there solely on account of his or her presence there, faces a real
      risk of being subjected to indiscriminate violence, and serious harm
      within the scope of Article 15(c).  The FtT Judge declined to depart
      from that country guidance, and states, at [34], as follows:


         "AA remains country guidance and I am not persuaded that the
         limited evidence referred to in the March 2017 CPIN amounts to very
         strong grounds supported by cogent evidence that I should depart
         from the country guidance... I also take into account that in both
         BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) and AAH, the
         Tribunal did not suggest that AA should no longer be followed."


   9. At paragraphs [35] and [36] of the decision, the Judge concludes as
      follows:


         "35. In the Asylum Decision, the respondent does not suggest that
         the appellant could relocate to either Baghdad or the IKR.
         Therefore, the only issue I must consider is whether he could
         return to Kirkuk. I have found that little about his account is
         credible and therefore I am not persuaded that he has no access to
         his CSID at this time. I find it is not credible that he was able
         to remain in contact with his family in Iraq since he left in 2015
         but that contact was suddenly ceased around the time of his asylum
         interview. However, as is evident from AA, he would be unable to
         travel to Kirkuk as it is a contested area. As a result, I consider
         that he is entitled to humanitarian protection.


         36.  I note at this juncture that I would have found there was
         nothing about the appellant's profile which would have made it
         unduly harsh on him to relocate to the IKR. However, as noted
         above, the respondent has not raised this in the asylum decision
         and therefore, the appellant has not addressed this in his
         evidence. It is for the respondent to put forward the basis upon
         which it is submitted that the appellant could not return to Iraq;
         the sole arguments put forward by the respondent is that Kirkuk is
         no longer a contested area and therefore, this is the only argument
         I have considered in respect of the appellant's claim for
         humanitarian protection. Therefore, I make no finding that he could
         relocate to the IKR."


The appeal before me


  10. The respondent claims that in allowing the appeal, the FtT Judge
      failed to address whether the appellant has access to, or is able to
      obtain a CSID, and that's the failure to address that issue is
      material, because it has an impact upon the assessment of whether the
      appellant could return to Iraq. Furthermore, the assessment as to
      whether the appellant could return to Iraq proceeds solely by
      reference to return to Kirkuk, and in reaching his decision, the FtT
      Judge failed to consider whether the appellant could internally
      relocate. The respondent claims that the Judge's reasons for not
      considering returning to the IKR, are inadequate and factually
      incorrect.


  11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft on
      14th December 2018. The matter comes before me to consider whether or
      not the decision of FtT Judge Siddiqi involved the making of a
      material error of law.


  12. On behalf of the respondent, Mr McVeety accepted that the Judge was
      not invited to consider internal relocation outside the Kirkuk area.
      In the respondent's decision of 4th October 2018, the respondent
      accepted that the appellant comes from Kirkuk, and that he is of
      Kurdish ethnicity. The respondent proposed that the appellant will be
      returned to Kirkuk, via Baghdad airport, and noted that the appellant
      has a mother, brother and sister in Kirkuk, and would be able to
      obtain his CSID.  At paragraph [72] of the respondent's decision, the
      respondent concluded that the appellant had not shown that it would be
      unreasonable to expect him to return to Kirkuk. However, Mr McVeety
      submits that if it were found that the appellant could not return to
      his home area, it was incumbent upon the Judge to consider whether the
      appellant could internally relocate. Here, he submits, the Judge
      notes, at paragraph [36], that there is nothing about the appellant's
      profile which would have made it unduly harsh for him to relocate to
      the IKR. The Judge simply failed to address that issue because of his
      view that the respondent had not raised this in the decision, and the
      matter has therefore not been addressed in the appellant's evidence.


  13. In reply, Ms Patel relies upon the matters set out in a Rule 24
      response settled by her and dated 18th January 2019. She maintains
      that the decision of the FtT Judge discloses no material error of law,
      when read as a whole.  She submits that the FtT Judge carefully
      considered the case advanced by the respondent, and the background
      material relied upon by the respondent. It was open, she submits, to
      the Judge to conclude that the respondent has not established that the
      limited evidence set out in the March 2017 CPIN, amounts to very
      strong and cogent evidence such that the Judge should depart from the
      established country guidance.  She submits the Judge properly applied
      the relevant country guidance, and it was open to the Judge to allow
      appeal on Article 2, 3, and humanitarian protection grounds. Ms Patel
      submits that the question of internal relocation is not a Robinson
      obvious point, and the FtT Judge was only required to deal with the
      case advanced by the respondent. She submits that the appellant had no
      opportunity to deal with the issues relevant to internal relocation.
      Had internal relocation been a part of the respondent's decision, the
      appellant would have wished to adduce evidence regarding his ability
      to travel to the IKR, and live there.


Discussion


  14. It was common ground between the parties that the appellant comes from
      Kirkuk.  It is correct, as Mr McVeety readily conceded, that at
      paragraph [72] of the respondent's decision, the respondent concluded
      that the appellant had not shown that it would be unreasonable to
      expect him to return to Kirkuk.


  15. Although the FtT Judge was not assisted in his consideration of the
      issues in the appeal by the vague terms of the respondent's decision,
      particularly concerning the risk upon return, in my judgement,
      although the respondent's focus appeared to be on the ability of the
      appellant to return to Kirkuk, the respondent did not entirely rule
      out relocation elsewhere in Iraq.  I note that at paragraph [73] of
      the respondent's decision, the respondent claimed that the appellant
      has already demonstrated considerable personal fortitude in relocating
      to the UK and attempting to establish a life here.  The respondent
      went on to state; ".. You have offered no explanation as to why you
      could not demonstrate the same resolve to re-establish your life in
      Iraq. It is therefore concluded that you have skills that you could
      utilise upon your return to Iraq. As such you do not qualify for
      international protection.".  At paragraph [82] of the decision, the
      respondent claimed that ".. internal relocation is, in general,
      possible to all areas of Iraq except ... the parts of Kirkuk
      governorate in and around, Hawija.".


  16. The internal flight doctrine is effectively an assertion that although
      an applicant may risk persecution or a breach of the fundamental
      rights in their home area, the individual claiming international
      protection, could find safety somewhere else in their own country. If
      that is established, then their claim for international protection is
      likely to fail. The enquiry is directed to the identification of a
      possibility of meaningful protection within the boundaries of the home
      state.  Having found out that the appellant could not return to
      Kirkuk, it was in my judgement incumbent upon the Judge to consider
      whether it will be unduly harsh to expect the appellant, who the Judge
      found, could not return to Kirkuk, to move to a less hostile part of
      the country.  Paragraph 339C of the immigration rules provides that a
      person will be granted humanitarian protection in the UK if they do
      not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of The Refugee or
      Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations
      2006 but there are substantial grounds for believing that the person
      concerned, if returned to the country of return, will face a real risk
      of suffering serious harm and, is unable, or, owing to such risk,
      unwilling to avail themselves of the protection of that country.


  17. In R v SSHD ex parte Robinson (1998) QB 929 the Court of Appeal held
      that, since the appellate authorities are obliged to ensure that the
      appellant's removal would not breach the UK's obligations under the
      Refugee Convention, where there was a readily discernible and obvious
      point, the appellate authority should nevertheless apply it.  An
      obvious point, per Lord Woolf MR at [946] is one that has a strong
      prospect of success. Although I accept that the respondent's focus, in
      his decision, appeared to be on the ability of the appellant to return
      to Kirkuk, the respondent had, at the very least hinted, in the
      decision refusing the appellant's claim for international protection,
      that the appellant could re-establish his life in Iraq.  The fact that
      the question of whether the appellant could internally relocate to the
      IKR, was relevant to the question of whether or not the appellant's
      removal would breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee
      Convention, was plainly recognised by FtT Judge.  He noted, at [36],
      that he would have found there was nothing about the appellant's
      profile which would have made it unduly harsh for him to relocate to
      IKR. The Judge made no finding as to whether the appellant could
      relocate to the IKR, simply because in his view, the respondent had
      not raised that, in his decision.  In failing to address that issue,
      in my judgement the FtT Judge erred in law. That error of law, is
      clearly one that is capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.


  18. The Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944
      confirmed that return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region
      (IKR) will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad.  In
      AAH, the Upper Tribunal replaced section E of the Country Guidance
      annexed to the Court of Appeal's decision in AA.  The Upper Tribunal
      confirmed that whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national
      returnee to obtain a new CSID whether the individual is able to do so,
      or do so within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the individual
      circumstances. The Tribunal set out the relevant factors, including
      inter alia whether the individual has any other form of documentation,
      or information about the location of his entry in the civil register,
      and the location of the relevant civil registry office and whether it
      is operational.


  19. The Country guidance confirms that even a Kurd who does not originate
      from the IKR may enter the IKR lawfully for up to 10 days, and then
      extend his stay to settle there, having found employment.  There is a
      need to consider wider issues such as travel between Baghdad and the
      IKR, the documents that will be available to an individual, whether
      the individual will be at particular risk of ill treatment during the
      security screening process, and the options available for
      accommodation and employment.


  20. It follows that in my judgment, the decision of the FtT Judge is
      infected by a material error of law and must be set aside.  As to the
      disposal of the appeal, I have decided that it is appropriate to remit
      this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having taken into account
      paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th
      September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and
      extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The
      parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing
      in due course.


  21. Subject to any representations made by the parties to the FtT Judge at
      the rehearing of the appeal, in my judgement, the findings of FtT
      Judge concerning the account of events relied upon by the appellant,
      are to be preserved.  In particular, the following findings are
      preserved.


        a. The appellant did not enter into a relationship with SB.


        b. The appellant did not become friends with [A] and a group linked
           to Daesh and the appellant was not threatened or shot at by that
           group.


        c. The appellant is not at risk upon return from the family of Ms
           SB's ex-husband.


Notice of Decision


  22. The appeal is allowed and the appeal is remitted the FtT for a fresh
      hearing.  The issue for the FtT will be whether the appellant can
      internally relocate to the IKR, if he cannot return to his home area.


  23. I have made an anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date          2nd May 2019

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter for re-hearing before the
FtT.  In any event, no fee was paid and there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date          2nd May 2019

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
