
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12748/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision and Reasons promulgated |
|on 12 December 2017                       |On 02 February 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     R K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr T Hussain instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm.

For the Respondent: Ms Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        O'Hanlon, promulgated on 12 May 2017, in which the Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Iran born on [  ]  1985.  The  Judge
        noted the respondent accepted the appellant's reasons for  claiming
        asylum, based on his imputed political opinion, engaged the Refugee
        Convention. The appellant's nationality and identity are  also  not
        in dispute.
     3. Having considered the evidence with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny the Judge sets out findings  of  fact  from  [28]  of  the
        decision under challenge.
     4. The Judge notes at [29] that the key finding to be made in the case
        related  to  the  appellant's  credibility.  Having  assessed   the
        evidence, the Judge did not find the appellant  to  be  a  credible
        witness.  The  Judge's  findings  of  fact  in  support   of   this
        conclusion, and lack of risk on return, can be  summarised  in  the
        following terms:


                a. The respondent conceded that the  evidence  showed  there
                   were riots in Mahabad City on 7 May  2015  following  the
                   suicide of a  Kurdish  girl  after  being  raped  by  the
                   Iranian Ettela'at. The  applicant  claims  to  have  been
                   involved in such demonstrations. The respondent  accepted
                   the applicant provided information  in  relation  to  the
                   demonstration  which  was  broadly  consistent  with  the
                   internal evidence but considered the applicant had failed
                   to  provide  any  evidence  of  his  attendance  at  that
                   demonstration and his activities  at  the  demonstration.
                   The  Judge  found  it  somewhat  implausible   that   the
                   appellant would, at his first active political  activism,
                   become involved in the burning of an Iranian  flag  which
                   action, as it is admitted elsewhere, would result in  his
                   execution or long-term imprisonment [31].
                b. The Judge found the appellant's account of the  visit  to
                   his home address by the Ettela'at some  four  days  after
                   the demonstration to be unsatisfactory. The  Judge  noted
                   the respondent's claim that the appellant's  evidence  in
                   relation to security  forces  who  were  present  at  the
                   demonstration and the fact the appellant was not arrested
                   in the act of burning the flag is inconsistent,  but  did
                   not find that to be determinative in light  of  the  fact
                   events at a significant demonstration would  be  volatile
                   and  fast  moving.  The  Judge  did  find,  however,  the
                   appellants evidence as to his identification and  tracing
                   by  the  Iranians  security  services  and  his  evidence
                   relating to the arrest warrant and photograph brought  to
                   his parent's home to be lacking in  credibility.  Despite
                   the appellant claiming an arrest warrant  and  photograph
                   had  been  brought  to  his  house  on  an  occasion  the
                   appellant was not present, he had not  asked  his  family
                   about the content of  the  arrest  warrant  or  what  the
                   photograph showed. The Judge found it difficult to credit
                   that the appellant would not  ask  his  family  what  the
                   security services were accusing him of and what  evidence
                   they had which was causing them to attempt to execute  an
                   arrest warrant [32].
                c. The Judge placed no weight upon  respondent's  submission
                   that the Iranian authorities will not be able to identify
                   and trace the appellant from a photograph in light of the
                   background information stating the Ettela'at are a highly
                   trained  and  efficient  security  force  and  that  such
                   tracing could have taken place [33].
                d. The Judge considered the appellant's political activities
                   in the United Kingdom and the photograph showing  he  had
                   taken part in a demonstration in London on 12  July  2016
                   outside the Austrian Consulate. The  appellant  indicated
                   he  had  not  become  involved  in  any  other  political
                   activities with the KDPI in the United Kingdom because he
                   had not been informed of the same and had  not  made  any
                   approach to this group  although  claimed  he  had  close
                   friends who were active. The Judge found the  appellant's
                   evidence in this respect to be lacking credibility as  on
                   the one account the appellant claimed he had been  forced
                   to leave his home country as a result of his behaviour at
                   a political demonstration, claimed he felt more free  and
                   able to be involved in political matters  in  the  United
                   Kingdom, yet had only attended one demonstration and  had
                   not become involved in any  other  political  activities.
                   This was not found to be credible [34].
                e. The Judge found in light of the above findings as to lack
                   of political activities in the United  Kingdom  that  the
                   appellant did not  have  a  genuine  subjective  fear  on
                   return to Iran due to his imputed political opinion  [35]
                   and that he will not be at risk on return as a result  of
                   his illegal exit [36].
                f. The appellant's  representative  asserted  the  appellant
                   would be at risk in relation to Internet  activities  but
                   the Judge states that he had not  seen  evidence  of  any
                   significant Internet history of the appellant which would
                   bring him to the attention of  the  Iranian  authorities.
                   The evidence seen was a photograph on a Facebook page  of
                   another person and the Judge did not consider  there  was
                   any reasonable likelihood of the appellant coming to  the
                   attention of Iranian authorities on this basis [37].
                g. The Judge did not consider the appellant would be at risk
                   on  return  at  a  'pinch  point'  due  to  the  lack  of
                   credibility in his claim [38].
                h. The Judge found the applicant  was  not  entitled  to  be
                   recognised as a refugee [39], was not entitled to a grant
                   of humanitarian protection [40], or that there would be a
                   breach of the European Convention of Human Rights  [41  -
                   42].


     5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which was granted by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  grounds  it  was
        arguable the Judge failed to give adequate or  sustainable  reasons
        for rejecting the appellant's account.
     6. The respondent opposes the application in the Rule 24  response  of
        the 27 September 2017.



Error of law submissions


     7. The appellant asserts that the Judge erred in rejecting his account
        as he failed to express any sustainable  reasons  as  to  why  this
        should be so. It is asserted at  [31]  that  the  Judge  noted  the
        respondent conceded that the demonstration the appellant claims  to
        have been involved in took place but  argues  the  finding  it  was
        somewhat implausible the appellant would  become  involved  in  the
        burning of a flag at his first expression of political  dissent  to
        be "somewhat implausible" is  not  a  sustainable  reason  for  the
        rejection of the appellant's account.
     8. The appellant asserts the Judge provides inconsistent  findings  in
        relation to the finding the appellant's account of the visit of the
        authorities to his parent's house was unsatisfactory because he had
        not asked his family what he was being accused of.
     9. It was submitted a reading the  determination  did  not  allow  the
        appellant to understand why his claim had been rejected as the  key
        reason for finding the appellant not to be credible  and  rejecting
        his account was not explained. It was  submitted  adequate  reasons
        had not been given and that  there  was  no  inconsistency  in  the
        appellant's case.
    10. The Secretary of State's case is that the decision is  sustainable.
        It is argued in the Rule 24 response that the grounds amount  to  a
        disagreement with the findings and are misconceived  as  the  Judge
        did not find, even accepting the country material evidence that the
        demonstration referred to by the appellant  took  place,  that  the
        appellant had actually attended the demonstration.
    11. It was submitted on the respondent's behalf that what the appellant
        was trying to do is to find the Judge should have given reasons for
        reasons.  It was argued the Judge gave adequate reasons for why the
        claim was not accepted.
    12. In reply the Mr  Hussain  referred  to  the  appellant's  sur  plas
        activities and submits it was clearly found that the appellant  did
        attend a demonstration in the United Kingdom.  As  such  the  Judge
        should have assessed the risk arising therefrom. It  was  submitted
        that as it was the appellants first  demonstration  'human  nature'
        led to the flag being burnt  in  the  heat  of  the  moment  as  an
        expression of individual opinion.



Discussion



    13. Guidance on reasons challenges can be obtained  from  a  number  of
        authorities including Shizad (sufficiency of  reasons:  set  aside)
        [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) Blake J) in which the Tribunal held  that  (i)
        Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation  of  the
        conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
        those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
        makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by  the  judge;
        (ii) Although a decision may contain an  error  of  law  where  the
        requirements to give  adequate  reasons  are  not  met,  the  Upper
        Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the  First-tier
        Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-
        finding process cannot  be  criticised  and  the  relevant  Country
        Guidance has been taken into account, unless  the  conclusions  the
        judge draws from the primary data were not reasonably open  to  him
        or her.
    14. It was noted in MD (Turkey)  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1958  that
        adequacy meant no more nor less than that.  It was not a counsel of
        perfection.   Still  less  should  it  provide  an  opportunity  to
        undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to  see  if  they
        are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits.  The purpose
        of the duty to give reasons, is in part, to enable the losing party
        to know why she has lost and it is  also  to  enable  an  appellate
        court or tribunal to see what the reasons for the decision  are  so
        that they can be examined in  case  there  has  been  an  error  of
        approach.
    15. The Judge  clearly  gave  reasons  in  the  decision  for  why  the
        appellant's credibility was not accepted.  Those  reasons  arguably
        make sense when the decision is read  as  a  whole.  The  appellant
        claims that, whilst not being politically active in  the  past,  he
        attended a demonstration that it  was  accepted  by  reference  the
        country information had taken place in Iran. The  appellant  claims
        that he  is  at  risk  as  a  result  of  not  only  attending  the
        demonstration but also for burning an Iranian flag. The Judge notes
        the serious consequences for a person acting in  this  way  as  the
        burning of the flag  will  be  perceived  as  an  attack  upon  the
        government as well as the state  of  Iran.  The  Judge  notes  that
        execution or long-term imprisonment was likely to follow.
    16. There was no evidence before the Judge regarding how the  appellant
        felt at the demonstration but concluded it was not credible that he
        would have behaved in such a way as  his  first  demonstration.  Mr
        Hussain's submissions to the effect that the appellant got  carried
        away with the moment and did what he did as a  result  may  be  his
        opinion, but does not appear to reflect what was  said  before  the
        Judge.
    17. Despite committing such a serious act as the burning of a flag at a
        demonstration which was attended by the Iranians  security  forces,
        the appellants claim was that he was not arrested on  the  day.  He
        claims that he was able to return home and then four days later, at
        a time he just happened not to be present in the family  home,  the
        Iranian security services came to arrest him being in possession of
        both an arrest warrant  and  photograph.  Such  modus  operandi  in
        principle is not arguably imperceivably in all cases, as the police
        in the United Kingdom employ similar tactics  for  policing  large-
        scale events such as demonstrations and football  matches.  It  was
        therefore  necessary  for  the  Judge  to  consider  this  evidence
        together with all other evidence, in the  round,  which  the  Judge
        arguably did.
    18. The Judge found that not only was it implausible that the appellant
        would have involved himself in  a  potentially  fatal  activity  of
        burning an Iranian flag  on  his  first  occasion  of  attending  a
        demonstration,  which  is  an  arguably  sustainable  finding  when
        considered against the country information and the fact that  those
        in Iran would be fully aware of the consequences of such an action,
        but was also concerned with the combined fact that despite claiming
        that his property was visited by the Ettela'at  (an  organ  of  the
        Iranians security services with a reputation for taking a hard line
        approach to individuals who come to their intention, including  the
        use of inhumane treatment such as long  detention  and  torture  to
        secure confessions), the appellant did not asked his family members
        who clearly informed him of the  visit  what  was  written  on  the
        alleged arrest warrant  or  what  was  in  the  photograph.  It  is
        reasonable to assume, as the Judge did, that a person  having  been
        told they were the subject of adverse interest would have wanted to
        have known what the material was that was produced  at  the  house.
        The  fact  the  appellant  made  no  such  enquiry   in   all   the
        circumstances is arguably relevant  to  the  consideration  of  the
        credibility of the appellants claim. The finding by the Judge  that
        it was difficult to credit that the appellant  would  not  ask  his
        family what he was been accused of and what evidence they had is an
        arguably sustainable finding.
    19. The core finding by the Judge, that the appellant's  attendance  at
        the demonstration had not been made out, is a  finding  within  the
        range of those reasonably available to the Judge  on  the  evidence
        which is supported by adequate reasons. It  is  not  made  out  the
        reasons given are in any way irrational, deficient, or contrary  to
        the material the Judge was asked to consider.
    20. In relation to the appellant's activities in  the  United  Kingdom,
        the Judge noted the appellant had  attended  one  demonstration  in
        2016 outside the Austrian Consulate. It is not made out  that  this
        would have come to the attention of Iranian authorities. The  Judge
        noted the appellant had not  joined  any  other  group  within  the
        United Kingdom such as the KDPI. The Judge did not  find  that  the
        appellants claim to have been politically active in  attending  the
        demonstration in Iran, at which he burnt the flag, as support of  a
        claimed actual or potential imputed political opinion supported  by
        the evidence of a lack of activities in the United Kingdom. This is
        a finding within the range of those reasonably open to the Judge.
    21. In relation to Internet activities, the Judge noted the evidence of
        the same was poor  with  no  evidence  of  a  significant  Internet
        history that would bring the appellant  to  the  attention  of  the
        Iranian authorities. A photograph on the Facebook page of  another,
        referred to at [37], proves nothing other than the presence of  the
        photograph and maybe the content. It is  known  there  are  various
        Facebook settings including privacy settings which  prevent  access
        to an account. It is also not made out before the  Judge  that  the
        account in question is one which the Iranian authorities would have
        known about or shown any adverse interest in or have access to  the
        same. It is not made out who is responsible for the posting of  the
        photograph or why it could not be deleted. The finding by the Judge
        that the presence of the photograph did not establish arguable real
        risk is within the range of those reasonably available to the Judge
        on the evidence.
    22. Whilst the reasons given by the Judge may not  be  as  numerous  of
        those that may be given other appeals, I find  this  is  not  as  a
        result of a failure  to  understand  or  make  sufficient  relevant
        findings but rather as a  result  the  fact  that  on  the  limited
        evidence made available the Judge was not required to  do  more.  A
        reader of the determination clearly understands why the Judge  came
        to the conclusion he did. The Judge clearly considered  the  matter
        with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate
        reasons in support of the findings made. Whilst the  appellant  may
        disagree with those findings it has not been established that  they
        are in any way perverse, irrational, or contrary to the evidence.
    23. The appellant  has  failed  to  make  out  the  findings  were  not
        reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence  or  not  adequate  to
        support the adverse credibility finding. As such, the appellant has
        failed to make  out  anything  that  warrants  the  Upper  Tribunal
        interfering with this decision.

Decision

    24. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 31 January 2018












