

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/12062/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                             |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th December 2017                       |   On 7th December 2017          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     HB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Khan, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Asjad), who in a  determination  promulgated
    on the  11th  July  2017  dismissed  his  claim  for  protection.   The
    Appellant's immigration history is set out within the determination  at
    paragraph [1] and in the decision letter issued  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It can be summarised briefly as  follows.  The  applicant  left
    Algeria in 2008 or 2009 and went to France to study. He met  a  British
    national and married her on  29  October  2010.  In  November  2010  he
    submitted application for leave to remain based on his  marriage  to  a
    British national but was refused with no right of appeal on  4  January
    2011. He was later served with an IAS 151 A (notice to a person  liable
    to removal). On 13 July 2012 the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Narayan)
    heard his appeal against a decision made to remove him on 14 May  2012.
    In the determination promulgated on 25 July 2012  the  judge  dismissed
    his appeal under the  immigration  rules  but  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds. On 9 March 2015 he applied leave to  remain  as  the
    spouse of a settled person. The claim was refused on 3 August 2015.

 4.  On 4th April 2016 the Appellant made his  application  for  protection
    which resulted in a substantive interview and a decision letter  issued
    by the Secretary  of  State  dated  19th  October  2016  in  which  his
    application for asylum was refused.  The basis of his claim related  to
    his fear of his family on account of having married a Christian  woman.
    Whilst the marriage was no longer subsisting, it was asserted that  the
    family continued to threaten  him  with  harm.  The  threats  had  been
    relayed to him by his sister. The appellant relied  upon  a  number  of
    documents that have been sent from Algeria to demonstrate that he would
    be at risk of harm upon return, including court documentation.

 5. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 15th June  2017.  The
    basis of the Appellant's protection claim is recorded in  the  decision
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  findings  of  fact  reached  at
    paragraphs [6] to [19]. The judge considered the applicant's  claim  in
    the  light  of  the  previous  findings  made  by  Judge  Narayan  (see
    paragraphs 8 - 13) and reach the conclusion that there had been only  a
    passing reference to any potential risk in Algeria in 2012.  The  judge
    also made reference to the lack of a "letter  produced  in  2012"  (see
    paragraph 14). The judge also considered a number  of  documents  which
    purported to support his claim to be at risk  of  harm.  In  particular
    copies of the  appellant's  father's  identity  cards  and  information
    confirming his father's employment. There were a number of  photographs
    and also court documentation. The judge did not find the appellant  had
    given consistent evidence as to how the documents  had  come  into  his
    possession (see paragraphs  15  -  18).  Consequently  the  appeal  was
    dismissed on  credibility  grounds  principally  relating  to  how  the
    documents had originated.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds
    are set out in the papers dated 21st July 2017.  Permission was granted
    by First-tier Judge Kelly on the 5th October 2017.

 7. Thus the hearing  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  There  was  some
    discussion between the parties concerning the record  of  the  evidence
    given by the applicant as set out in Ground 1 and the witness statement
    made by the advocate concerned (see supplementary bundle). Mr Bates was
    able to extract the relevant parts of the former  presenting  officer's
    notes and I provided them with an extract  of  the  judge's  note.  The
    advocates then discussed this issue and  they  reached  agreement  that
    having considered that evidence that ground 1 was made out.  There  was
    also agreement as to the other grounds of challenge and it was conceded
    that there was a material error of law in the  judge's  assessments  of
    credibility and in particular  the  consideration  of  the  documentary
    evidence.  However,  whilst  he  submitted  that  there  were   adverse
    credibility points which were properly made by the judge, some of those
    did not go to the core of the claim and the findings  that  related  to
    the documents and how they were obtained, which  were  pivotal  to  the
    overall refusal of the claim.  Nonetheless, he  considered  that  there
    was a material error of law and that in those circumstances  he  agreed
    with Ms Khan who invited the Tribunal to set aside the decision and for
    the appeal to be reheard so that all  issues  relating  to  credibility
    could be considered.

 8. In the light of that concession made  by  Mr  Bates  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    it is the case that both parties agree that  the  determination  cannot
    stand and must be set aside.

 9.  I am satisfied that the central submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant to which I have made reference to, which concern the  adverse
    credibility findings are made out. In respect of ground 1, it had  been
    asserted that there had been a misunderstanding of the  evidence  which
    related to how the documents came into the appellant's  possession.  At
    paragraph 15 the judge had  stated  that  there  was  an  inconsistency
    between the appellant's witness statement at paragraph 10 of his appeal
    that his Algerian lawyer had sent him the photographs of his father and
    that this was inconsistent with his evidence and cross-examination that
    a  journalist  friend  had  sent   them   to   him.   The   appellant's
    representative provided a statement along with her handwritten notes in
    support of that ground. Mr Bates checked the presenting officer's  note
    and  it  was  accepted  by  him  that  it  did  not   demonstrate   any
    inconsistency because when seen in the context  of  the  questions  and
    answers given consecutively the appellant had stated  that  the  photos
    had been sent via the lawyer but that the original source came from the
    journalist. As to ground 2, it was similarly  common  ground  that  the
    interpretation of the evidence that related to how  the  documents  had
    come  into  the  possession  of  the  Algerian  lawyer  was  also   not
    inconsistent. At paragraph  16,  it  was  found  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was inconsistent because he had stated  that  the  lawyer  had
    handed his file accidentally with another file. However  there  was  no
    inconsistency between that answer and the letter  produced  within  the
    bundle and that his account that she had been handed them  accidentally
    was not inconsistent with that evidence. It is plain  from  considering
    the evidence that the appellant had produced a number of documents from
    Algeria which purported to  demonstrate  a  risk  of  harm.  They  were
    central to his appeal in establishing that risk. However  it  is  plain
    also from reading the determination that the judge had  not  found  his
    explanation credible as to the origins  of  those  documents  and  thus
    rejected them all as being "suspect in nature". It is now accepted that
    there had been a misunderstanding relating to  the  evidence  and  that
    those findings are therefore undermined. As the documents were relevant
    to the core of his claim and the establishment of risk, those  findings
    are not sustainable.

10. There is also a third ground of challenge which relates to the Internet
    domain names on the documentation. It appears that this had been raised
    in cross examination based on  documentary  evidence  produced  at  the
    hearing on behalf of the respondent. The judge placed weight on that at
    paragraph 17 and this did not give the opportunity for the appellant to
    meet that evidence it had been presented on the  day  of  the  hearing.
    There is now further evidence in that respect.

11. Mr Bates is right to observe that there were some  adverse  credibility
    findings made by the judge which were not  the  subject  of  challenge.
    However, I am satisfied for the reasons given by  both  advocates  that
    the decision cannot stand and will be set aside.

12. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the Appellant's evidence  and  also  of  a
    witness who did not give evidence before; this is a case in  which  the
    adverse  credibility  findings  are  therefore  unsafe  and  cannot  be
    preserved although as Mr Bates stated  the determination is a record of
    the evidence given by the appellant at that time.

13. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  this  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh. Ms Khan has requested that a case Management Review  be
    held before the final hearing  to  finalise  any  necessary  directions
    relating to the attendance of a witness.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  The direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed[pic]                             Date: 6/12/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
