
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12495/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 21 February 2018                       |on 27 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  RAMIN [D]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr T Haddow, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above,  but  the  rest  of  this  decision
    refers to them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals against the decision of FtT Judge P A Grant-Hutchison,
    promulgated on 3 October 2017, allowing the appellant's appeal.

 3. This decision should be read also with:

      i) the SSHD's grounds of  appeal,  attached  to  her  application  for
         permission dated 10 October 2017;

     ii) the appellant's rule 24 response dated 15 January 2018; and

    iii) the appellant's outline submissions dated 20 February 2018.

 4. The nub of the first ground is that the  judge  inadequately  explained
    why, having  concerns  over  the  appellant's  evidence,  he  preferred
    evidence from three church members, and that the  process  should  have
    been the testing of the appellant's evidence not  that  of  the  church
    members.

 5. On this matter, I prefer the submissions by Mr Haddow.

 6. The case was not a contest between the evidence from the appellant  and
    from the church witnesses, which was all designed to show the appellant
    to be a genuine Christian convert.

 7. The ground implies that  if  there  were  good  reasons  to  doubt  the
    evidence of the appellant,  his  case  could  not  be  saved  by  other
    evidence; but that is not the correct approach.  The judge had to  test
    the evidence both of the appellant and of the church members, and  then
    reach his eventual decision in the round, giving appropriate weight  to
    all evidence (other than that found entirely false).

 8. The decision shows that is just what the judge did.

 9. The second ground is that the judge failed to take  account  of  issues
    raised under section 8 of the 2004 Act, and that the  reasoning  behind
    finding him to be a credible witness is flawed.

10.  Mr Haddow's first argument on this ground  was  that  the  appellant's
    claim did not rely on a finding that he was credible, which was not  in
    the decision, and the case turned on  the  credibility  of  independent
    witnesses.  For the sufficiency of such  evidence  he  referred  to  SA
    (Iran) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin) at paragraph 24, where the judge
    was at a loss to understand how a professed conversion was to be tested
    by anything other than active participation in church.

11. SA (Iran) v SSHD is not authoritative; the remarks made at paragraph 24
    were  obiter;  and  they  have  not  found  favour  in  any  subsequent
    conversion case, many of which have come before  courts  and  tribunals
    since 2012.  Difficult as the task may be, judges have  to  decide  not
    only whether appellants are outwardly observant but whether, on all the
    evidence, they are genuine.

12. On this aspect, I therefore prefer the submission by Mrs  O'Brien  that
    without such a finding, the appellant's case must have failed.

13. The SSHD's complains not that the judge  made  no  finding  of  genuine
    conversion, but that the finding lacked the  underpinning  required  by
    law.  Paragraph 17 is to be read as a finding of a genuine  conversion.
    The judge's view was that while the appellant would not have  succeeded
    by his own evidence, his case was dragged over the line by the rest  of
    the evidence (of which, as Mr Haddow pointed  out,  there  was  a  good
    deal, both oral and written).

14. The remaining point is the judge's approach to section 8, which was the
    main focus of Mrs O'Brien's submissions.

15. As pointed out in the refusal letter and in the grounds, the section  8
    point was strong, based on use of false identity,  date  of  birth  and
    travel history in a persistent attempt to enter the UK from France  and
    failing to take  reasonable  opportunities  of  seeking  asylum  before
    arriving in the UK.

16. The point was strong but not necessarily decisive.  The judge  recorded
    its underpinning at paragraph 1.  At paragraph 19 he simply said, "I do
    not believe that section 8 applies as I have decided matters  on  wider
    issues of credibility".

17. That wording opened  the  way  to  the  criticism  in  the  ground  and
    submissions of failing to take account of statutory factors  which  the
    judge had no jurisdiction to disapply.  Mr Haddow fairly accepted  that
    the meaning of  paragraph  19  is  not  entirely  clear,  and  that  to
    disregard section 8 entirely would be an error of law.

18. Mr Haddow referred to cases on inadequacy of  reasoning,  to  show  the
    exacting standard required of a challenge, and to  contrast  this  case
    with examples where reasoning was found inadequate.  In VV (grounds  of
    appeal) [2016] UKUT 00053 the  UT  at  paragraph  25  referred  to  the
    approval in the House of Lords of a statement by Sir Thomas Bingham  MR
    that an issue  of  adequacy  of  reasons  was  to  be  resolved  "on  a
    straightforward  reading  without  excessive  legalism  or   exegetical
    sophistication".

19. Judge are well used to section 8, which is a feature of  many  (perhaps
    most) protection cases, and is subject to settled case law.

20. No doubt the judge might have framed paragraph 19 differently if he had
    an eye to later close forensic challenge, but in my view  the  decision
    is to the effect that although serious points  were  made  against  the
    appellant's credibility, including section 8 issues, his evidence as  a
    whole disclosed a reasonable likelihood that he is a  genuine  convert.
    That involved giving section 8 issues such weight as they deserved, not
    a misconception that judges are not bound to apply statute.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
            22 February 2018
