
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12614/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th March 2020                            |On 28th April 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mr K W
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic instructed by MTC & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 23rd October 2018 to refuse his claim  for  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and claim under the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    specifically Articles 3 and 8.  Ms Asanovic made  clear  the  appellant
    was not making a 'separate' Article 3 claim but one that  was  part  of
    the overall asylum claim. The appellant is a  national  of  Sri  Lanka,
    Sinhalese, and was born on 24th November 1985.

 2. The appellant's first appeal hearing took place in 2018 and a  decision
    promulgated on 31st December 2018 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  L  K
    Gibbs who dismissed the appellant's appeal but found  him  credible  in
    respect of his account of past  persecution  and  torture  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.   A  material  error  of  law  was  found  in  that
    decision.  The Upper Tribunal directed a rehearing before  a  different
    judge with the positive credibility finding  in  respect  of  his  past
    persecution  preserved.   The  matter   was   reheard   by   Designated
    Immigration Judge (DIJ) Manuell who promulgated a further  decision  on
    26th July 2019 again dismissing the appellant's  appeal  on  protection
    and human rights grounds.  On 23rd December 2019 an error  of  law  was
    found in the decision of DIJ Manuell and that decision was  set  aside.
    No direction was given as to the previously preserved finding and  this
    was maintained.  The error of law was found on the basis that the judge
    had failed to follow the country guidance in GJ and others (post  civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

 3. The finding of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibbs  finding  which  was
    preserved states as follows:

"I am therefore satisfied that although the appellant is Sinhalese, because
of his friendship with Prabu, a Tamil who was suspected of LTTE, he was
detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities.  I find that the
appellant was released because a bribe was paid and thereafter left Sri
Lanka.  I find that he has limited contact with his friends and family in
Sri Lanka but genuinely believes that the Sri Lankan authorities remain
interested in him."

 4. Judge Mailer setting aside the decision of Judge Gibbs stated as
    follows:

"28.  In that respect, it was incumbent upon the Judge to consider whether
the appellant, having previously been released on the payment of a bribe,
would be recorded as an escapee or an absconder resulting in absconder
action being commenced against him - paragraph [146] and paragraph [13] of
Appendix J, of GJ.

29.   Nor was there any consideration given as to whether the appellant
would appear on a 'stop' or 'watch list' following his escape from
detention.  There was evidence which post dated GJ produced by Freedom From
Torture dated 2017 regarding ongoing detention of those with imputed and
low-level involvement with the LTTE after 2015.  The question therefore was
whether there has been a significant change in the focus of the authorities
as referred to by the Judge at [36].

30.   Moreover, she did not consider that there remains a computerised,
intelligence led watch list.  There was no evidence that the mere passage
of time would lead to the removal of a person in the position of the
appellant from these computerised records."

 5. Judge Mailer observed that GJ had  not  been  adequately  followed  and
    issues raised in the appeal had not been addressed.

    Immigration History

 6. The appellant entered the United Kingdom travelling on his own passport
    on 14th September 2009 with a Tier 4 (General) Student  visa  endorsed.
    He had leave to remain until 16th November 2011.  On 15th November 2011
    the appellant sought to extend his Tier 4 (General) Student  leave  but
    was refused on 3rd January 2012 and on 12th January  2012  applied  for
    further leave to remain on Article 8 grounds but that  was  refused  on
    17th January 2013.  He nevertheless  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without leave.  He claimed asylum on 24th October 2017.

    Documentation

 7. The evidence before me comprised a Home Office  bundle  which  included
    the screening interview dated 1st December 2017 and an asylum interview
    dated 14th May 2018.  The appellant's bundle was that supplied  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  split  into  nineteen   sections   and   included
    subjective and background material including  the  appellant's  witness
    statement and medical evidence including a psychiatric  report  written
    by Dr Chiedu  Obuaya, Consultant  Psychiatrist,   dated  20th  November
    2018.  This latter report  was  included  in  the  appellant's  initial
    bundle.  For the hearing before me Ms  Asanovic  helpfully  supplied  a
    skeleton argument together with an appellant's supplementary bundle  in
    fifteen sections relating to background country information.

 8. At the hearing Mr Tufan referred to a "Report of a  Home  Office  Fact-
    Finding Mission to Sri Lanka" conducted between 28th  September  and  5
    October 2019 and published on 20th January 2020.

    The appellant's case

 9. The appellant did not give evidence at the hearing before me but relied
    on his witness statement which relayed that he was a Sinhalese Buddhist
    and worked as a store assistant in Sri Lanka and lived at home with his
    parents.  In 2002 he met someone by the name  of  Prabu  Selvaraj,  the
    same age as him, and they became very good friends albeit he was Tamil.
     He did not suspect Prabu had political involvement because  they  were
    young at the time but the appellant was later detained because  of  his
    association with him and when he was taken from his home he  found  out
    Prabu was an LTTE member.  The last time he saw Prabu  was  around  May
    2009.  In August 2009 the appellant's  home  was  visited  and  he  was
    removed for questioning.  He stated he was accused of  being  a  person
    who had helped the LTTE and he was beaten and tortured.  He was shown a
    photograph of his friend Prabu  in  LTTE  uniform  which  was  when  he
    realised that he was connected to the LTTE and that he must  have  been
    in custody.

10. The appellant disclosed he was forced to drink water from  a  lavatory,
    stripped naked and hung upside down and beaten.  He was questioned  two
    to three times a day and they took his fingerprints on a blank sheet of
    paper and another on a piece of paper which had writing in Sinhalese on
    it, but he did not read the contents of the document because he was  in
    too much pain.  After about a week he was  removed  in  a  vehicle  and
    taken to a place where he was dropped off with his  face  covered.   He
    was released with the money from his  uncle  who  is  wealthy  and  the
    influence of the monk and they were able  to  bribe  the  officials  to
    allow him to escape from detention.  The appellant stated that when  he
    applied for his visa he did not know Prabu was a member of the LTTE but
    the monk told him that obtaining a visa would be a safe option and that
    he should leave the country.  The monk told him he would not  have  any
    problems getting through the airport if he went to a specific person at
    the counter and he was told which person to ask for at the airport.

11. When he came to the UK he thought it would be  temporary  and  that  he
    would be able to return.  He was not aware that he  could  explain  his
    problems back home and get leave on that basis and when  his  visa  was
    not granted he thought he would wait  and  return  to  Sri  Lanka  when
    things got better.  He was scared to approach the Home  Office  because
    he thought he might be sent back.

12. In 2017 he was thinking about returning to Sri Lanka and had  booked  a
    ticket, which was evidenced, and decided he would go back but he called
    his friend who told him that his mother had said  he  should  not  come
    back because he was not safe and there had been  three  visits  to  his
    parents' home in 2016, the last being in December  2016  and  that  was
    when he approached his current solicitor  who  had  advised  him  about
    claiming asylum.  He had very little knowledge of  the  asylum  process
    and it was only when he got legal advice in 2017 that he  was  told  he
    should claim asylum at the Home Office.

13. The appellant claims that he  will  be  arrested  at  the  airport  and
    physically, mentally and sexually abused by the police or the CID owing
    to his alleged association with the LTTE should he return.

    The Secretary of State's refusal

14. The Secretary of State refused his claim on protection  and  Article  8
    family/private life grounds and made a  series  of  credibility  points
    against the appellant which included that  it  was  not  credible  that
    neither he nor his uncle nor the Buddhist  monk  would  seek  immediate
    medical attention for his injuries, that he had  assumed  that  he  had
    escaped from detention because of the influence of  the  Buddhist  monk
    having arranged for a bribe to  facilitate  his  escape,  that  it  was
    implausible that the specific person he was  said  to  contact  at  the
    airport, he had not been able  to  corroborate  as  having  significant
    influence, was able to breach immigration controls to allow him to move
    freely through the airport because in view of his  physical  appearance
    and injuries he would have been stopped and questioned.

15. Further, the booking of the  flight  ticket  on  22nd  March  2017  was
    indication of his intention to return to Sri Lanka showing  that  there
    was no risk and that by his own admission he was not charged  with  any
    offence whilst in Sri Lanka, AIR question 61.

16. Furthermore, he left Sri Lanka using his own passport and moved through
    the airport in Sri Lanka without encountering any difficulties.

17. The Secretary of State at paragraph 59 of the  refusal  decision  cited
    its Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN) on Sri Lanka  June  2017
    at 2.3.35:

         "Those on the 'watch list' are persons that are of interest to  the
         authorities for minor offences or are former LTTE cadres; those  on
         the 'stop list' are persons who have committed serious crime,  have
         a warrant outstanding, or perceived to be connected to terrorism".

18. It was concluded that based on his exit from Sri Lanka  using  his  own
    passport and visa it  was  indicative  of  there  being  no  motive  or
    interest from the Sri Lankan authorities in him.

19. In relation to Section 8 he had only made the asylum  claim  after  two
    previous failed applications for leave to remain and a failed Article 8
    application despite having the assistance of a visa consultant  in  the
    UK.  His credibility was damaged as a result and his claim rejected.

20. The decision cited extensively from GJ but concluded that the appellant
    did not fall into the risk  category  as  identified  in  that  country
    guidance.  The appellant did not play a significant role in relation to
    post-conflict Tamil separatism.  The LTTE in Sri Lanka had not held any
    military or political authority since the end of the civil war in  2009
    and in general a person who evidenced  past  membership  in  connection
    with the LTTE would not  in  itself  warrant  international  protection
    unless they are perceived to have a  significant  role.   The  material
    facts of his claim were rejected in their entirety and he  was  not  at
    risk on return to Sri Lanka.

21. Additionally, it was not accepted that the authorities would  still  be
    looking for him because the new  government  of  Sri  Lanka  no  longer
    perceived former LTTE members to be a threat not least because the LTTE
    in Sri Lanka was considered a spent force and there were  no  terrorist
    incidents since the end of the civil war  in May 2009.  In  particular,
    the Secretary of State cited the Country Policy  and  Information  Note
    Sri Lanka: Tamil separatism, version 5, June 2017 at 2.3.15 stating:

         "Being a non-Tamil perceived as having support for  or  involvement
         with Tamil separatist groups does not itself put a person  more  or
         less at risk or give rise to a well-founded fear of persecution  or
         serious harm in Sri Lanka (as demonstrated in para 98 and  Appendix
         F - para 22(vi) of GJ and Others)".



Submissions

22. At the hearing before me Mr Tufan submitted that it was not clear which
    category of risk the appellant fell into.  He was taken to  the  police
    station and mistreated and detained and tortured but the word  'arrest'
    was not used in the preserved findings of Judge Gibbs.  At paragraph 61
    of his asylum interview the appellant confirmed there were  no  charges
    against him and therefore he did not fall into  the  risk  category  of
    where there was a court order or an arrest warrant.  It was  perplexing
    that no attempt had been made to clear the appellant's name bearing  in
    mind he was still in contact with his family and had  a  wealthy  uncle
    who could instruct lawyers.  He had engaged in no  sur  place  activity
    and there was a considerable  Section  8  point  to  take  against  him
    bearing in mind he had failed to claim asylum closer to  the  time  the
    incidents had occurred.

23. Mr Tufan relied heavily on the Fact-Finding Mission Report stating that
    Sinhalese were not normally of interest.  The report at page 14  stated
    that those who were prominent in their activism would  be  of  interest
    and at 3.2.5 that there were changing attitudes within Sri Lanka.   The
    appellant was not a prominent activist and at  the  time  thousands  of
    Tamils were arrested albeit temporarily.  There was no suggestion there
    were outstanding criminal offences and he did not have a high  profile.
    There was no suggestion that a summons had been  given  to  the  family
    albeit the police had gone to his home.  Mr Tufan underlined the  point
    that there were no criminal offences listed against the  appellant  and
    submitted that the appellant was Sinhalese, had not engaged in any  sur
    place activity and had made no efforts to 'clear his name' since he had
    been in the UK despite having wealthy relatives in Sri Lanka who  could
    help to access legal advice. Sinhalese were not normally of interest to
    the authorities. There would be no interest in him  on  return  and  he
    would not be stopped.

24. Mr Tufan relied on KH (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1354,  particularly
    paragraph 33 which  confirmed  that  the  presence  of  mental  illness
    amongst failed asylum seekers was not exceptional.

25. Ms Asanovic submitted that the Tribunal should not rely  on  the  Fact-
    Finding Report for two reasons.  First, the report was based on a visit
    last year at a time when a different government was in place,  and  the
    previous government which was recognised as having made  some  progress
    and efforts at reconciliation had since  been  replaced  with  that  of
    Gotabaya Rajapaksa in November 2019.  Since November 2019  a  Rajapaksa
    government had  taken  steps  such  as  the  increase  in  the  use  of
    surveillance.  Secondly, Ms Asanovic criticised the methodology of  the
    compilation of the Fact-Finding Report  as  it  did  not  identify  the
    sources used and did not consider the fact that some of the sources did
    not wish to be identified.  Many  remained  anonymous.   Alternatively,
    the sources had a clear stake in painting a more  positive  picture  of
    the situation in Sri Lanka, for example  the  Commissioner  General  of
    Rehabilitation at section 3.3 and the CID.  The anonymity claims masked
    the identity and thus the integrity of the sources and Ms Asanovic  was
    unclear that the sources such as the  IOM  had  a  mandate  to  monitor
    enforced return (although she clarified at the end of the hearing  that
    there was some limited role).  The history of the  regime  was  one  of
    paranoia and the sources gave contradictory information and she invited
    me to "read between the lines".

26. Ms Asanovic cited her skeleton  argument  which  in  turn  referred  to
    recent country background material highlighting increased  tension  and
    surveillance by security services and human rights breaches  since  the
    terrorist attack and particularly  in  the  last  part  of  2019.   She
    referred to the abduction of an employee of  an  embassy  which  was  a
    particularly serious matter which illustrated the current  attitude  of
    the authorities.

27. She emphasised that GJ made no distinction between  an  arrest  warrant
    and no arrest warrant and the reference was  to  'unlawful  detention',
    that which had occurred to the appellant.  Criticism of the legislation
    was precise  because  it  allowed  detention  without  charge  and  the
    distinction being drawn by the Secretary of State in relation to arrest
    was artificial.  It was unknown if there was a summons because the last
    direct contact the appellant had with his family was in 2017.   Indeed,
    at paragraph 7.2.1 of the Fact-Finding Mission it  was  confirmed  that
    arrest warrants were not  given  to  families.   The  asylum  interview
    showed that at question 62 the appellant did state that he signed  some
    type of form and he did not know what it was.  Furthermore, he left  on
    a payment of bribe and that was part of a preserved finding.

28. Ms Asanovic submitted that it was very difficult to come to a different
    conclusion that if a person was released on payment of bribe they would
    be subject to an arrest warrant because it was a criminal offence.  The
    appellant's passport had expired  and  he  would  have  to  go  to  the
    authorities to renew it.  If sophisticated surveillance  and  stop  and
    watch lists were extant there was no reason to assume there would be no
    knowledge of someone's background and he was not expected to lie.

29. The appellant would be perceived as a threat to the Sri Lankan state as
    he was arrested post-cessation of hostilities  and  he  fell  into  the
    subcategories of the headnote of GJ.

Analysis and Discussion

30. I reiterate the  critical  part  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge which have been preserved as follows:

         "I am therefore satisfied that although the appellant is Sinhalese,
         because of his friendship with Prabu, a Tamil who was suspected  of
         LTTE, (sic)  he  was  detained  and  tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities.  I find that the  appellant  was  released  because  a
         bribe was paid and thereafter left Sri Lanka.  I find that  he  has
         limited contact with his  friends  and  family  in  Sri  Lanka  but
         genuinely  believes  that  the  Sri   Lankan   authorities   remain
         interested in him".

31. It is correct to state that the bulk  of  the  criticism  made  of  the
    appellant's account by the Secretary of State in the  refusal  decision
    related to implausibility rather than  tangible  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's  evidence  and  indeed  his  account  remained   consistent
    throughout.  He provided a detailed description of his torture  at  the
    hands of the Sri  Lankan  authorities  and  also  presented  supporting
    medical evidence from a range of sources  including  a  report  from  a
    community psychiatric nurse dated 13th March and from  Dr  Obuaya,  the
    Consultant  Psychiatrist.   The  expert  psychiatric  report  was   not
    disputed and the  report did credibly support his  account  of  torture
    and explain the appellant's delay in seeking treatment for  his  mental
    health problem.  As the Consultant Psychiatric recorded in  his  report
    at paragraph 35:

         "35.     Mr W is known to Barnet, Enfield  &  Haringey  NHS  Mental
             Health Trust, his local secondary care mental health provider,
             where  he  has  been  diagnosed  with  a  delayed  onset  post
             traumatic stress earlier this year.  He has been treated  with
             the antidepressant drugs fluoxetine and sertraline, as well as
             the hypnotic agent zopiclone.

         36.      It is documented that Mr W  described  flashbacks  to  his
             traumatic  detention  in  2009,  having  'brushed  aside'  his
             symptoms between then and 2017, when he saw his GP.   He  also
             had  nightmares  and  complained   of   a   low   mood,   poor
             concentration,  insomnia  and  hypervigilance.   He  was  also
             anhedonic.

         37.      I base my opinion on my objective clinical observations of
             Mr W's behaviour, speech and demeanour and not merely  on  the
             symptoms he described to me.

         38.      The onset of depressive illnesses is often  multifactorial
             and Mr W's symptoms had an onset in 2017.  It is not  possible
             to state which single factor(s) in isolation could account for
             the onset of  his  depressive  symptoms  as  described  above,
             though his traumatic detention in Sri Lanka,  coupled  with  a
             fear of return to Sri Lanka could account for this".

32. I acknowledge that KH identifies that failed asylum seekers  frequently
    experience  mental health issues but it is a factor which I  regard  as
    supporting rather than detracting from the  appellant's  account.   The
    report also explains  that medically there can be a delay in the  onset
    of mental health issues owing to previous trauma.

33. The psychiatric report also lends credence to the  explanation  by  the
    appellant of his delay in claiming asylum and when considering  whether
    the delay should detract from his credibility.  Indeed, JT  Cameroon  v
    SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 878 confirms that it is the duty of  the  judicial
    decision maker in every instance to reach his own conclusion  upon  the
    credibility of the claimant. Section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004 should be taken  only  as  part  of  a
    global assessment of credibility and is not  the  starting  point.  The
    appellant advanced that he feared approaching the Home Office  in  part
    thinking that his problems might be temporary and realising,  after  he
    had booked his ticket, that the interest in him  from  the  authorities
    had not abated.  He himself produced his return ticket which he did not
    have to do.  His mental  health  difficulties  as  evidenced  may  have
    contributed to his fear and thus the delay. I also accept that  he  may
    be afraid to contact his family in Sri Lanka should this  attract  them
    unwanted attention and that he  has  little  contact  with  them.   The
    information regarding the 'visit'  by the authorities emanated from his
    friend.  In  the  circumstances  it  is  possible  that  he  hoped  the
    situation in Sri Lanka would improve over time.  The appellant has  not
    sought in any way to 'elevate'  his claim by sur  place  activity.   It
    therefore find that the delay in claiming asylum  should  not  be  held
    against him and I further accept his account of his  contact  with  his
    friend.

34. Credibility findings have been made and preserved in  relation  to  the
    actual detention and torture but having accepted that part of the claim
    there is no reason to reject  the   appellant's  claims  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities have visited his  family  home  in  2016  and  their
    interest in him has continued.

35. I also accept that there is a fine line between  detention  and  arrest
    and that the distinction  may  be  artificial.   The  question  is  the
    perception of the authorities.  Although the  appellant's  response  to
    Q61 in his AIR indicated that he had  not  been  charged  with  an  any
    offence, his response to the following question, Q62, was that  he  had
    signed a blank piece of paper the contents of which  he  was  oblivious
    because he was in too much pain.  Bearing in mind his claim of  torture
    has been accepted, he may well have been in pain, and that he may  have
    been shown a charge sheet or signed a confession, unbeknown to him,  is
    logically possible.

36. His claim of bribery in relation to his escape  was  accepted  and  the
    appellant gave responses  over  a  series  of  questions  that  he  was
    released because he thought a bribe had  been  paid  and  this  was  in
    response to the questions at AIR Q47 and AIR Q55 -  "Do  you  know  for
    certain that you were released because of a bribe"?  "Yes,  that's  how
    the Buddhist monk told me but I  would  not  have  any  problems  now".
    Indeed, the appellant was pressed on this  particular  question.    The
    appellant maintained that  the  same  Buddhist  monk  assisted  him  to
    navigate the airport even on his own passport.   He  recounted  in  his
    asylum interview at Q66 that he was told to go to 'specific  people  on
    the counter' at the airport.  Given the appellant has to be treated  as
    a vulnerable witness and bearing in mind the psychiatric report, it  is
    unsurprising that he has forgotten the name of the  individual  at  the
    airport who helped him, and it is not inconceivable  that  having  been
    treated for six days by the monks that he would not necessarily have to
    seek formal medical attention or would be identified at the airport  in
    Sri Lanka because of his injuries. Indeed, his  case  is  that  he  was
    ushered through the airport with the assistance of  the  Buddhist  monk
    who is likely to have smoothed his path in that respect.

37. The real question is what interest the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
    have in the appellant on his return.

38. GJ is country guidance and sets out the risk categories in relation  to
    returns to Sri Lanka.  At the headnote GJ sets out the risk  categories
    as follows:

         "(1)      This determination replaces all existing country guidance
             on Sri Lanka.

         (2)      The focus of  the  Sri  Lankan  government's  concern  has
             changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.   The  LTTE  in
             Sri Lanka itself is a spent  force  and  there  have  been  no
             terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)      The government's present objective is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)      If a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
             services there remains a real risk of  ill-treatment  or  harm
             requiring international protection.

         (5)      Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka  for
             a person at real risk from the Sri Lankan  authorities,  since
             the government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and  Tamils
             are required to  return  to  a  named  address  after  passing
             through the airport.

         (6)      There are no detention facilities at  the  airport.   Only
             those whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained
             from the airport.  Any risk for those in whom the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.

         (7)       The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in
             detention or otherwise, are:

             (a)       Individuals who are,  or  are  perceived  to  be,  a
                  threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a  single  state
                  because they are, or are perceived to have  a  significant
                  role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism  within
                  the diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka.

             (b)       Journalists (whether in print  or  other  media)  or
                  human  rights  activists,  who,  in  either   case,   have
                  criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its
                  human  rights  record,  or   who   are   associated   with
                  publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.

             (c)       Individuals who have given evidence to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses.

             (d) A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"  list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)       The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is   based   on
             sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities  within  Sri
             Lanka and in the diaspora.  The Sri  Lankan  authorities  know
             that many Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as  economic
             migrants and also that everyone in the Northern  Province  had
             some level of involvement with the LTTE during the civil  war.
             In post-conflict Sri Lanka, an individual's past history  will
             be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by the Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

         (9)      The authorities maintain a  computerised  intelligence-led
             "watch" list.  A person whose name appears on a  "watch"  list
             is not reasonably likely to be detained  at  the  airport  but
             will be monitored by the security services after  his  or  her
             return.  If that monitoring does  not  indicate  that  such  a
             person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise the  unitary
             Sri Lankan state or revive the internal  armed  conflict,  the
             individual in question is not, in general,  reasonably  likely
             to be detained  by  the  security  forces.   That  will  be  a
             question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any  diaspora
             activities carried out by such an individual.

         (10)     Consideration must always be  given  to  whether,  in  the
             light  of  an  individual's  activities  and  responsibilities
             during the  civil  war,  the  exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
             (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of the
             Qualification  Directive).   Regard  should  be  had  to   the
             categories  for  exclusion  set  out   in   the   "Eligibility
             Guidelines For Assessing the International Protection Needs of
             Asylum-Seekers from Sri  Lanka",  published  by  UNHCR  on  21
             December 2012".

39. That the appellant is of Sinhalese ethnicity does not mean he  will  be
    exempt from the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.    It may  not
    be a specific risk factor to be Sinhalese and associated with the  LTTE
    over and above those risks  normally  associated  with  the  LTTE,  but
    because an appellant is Sinhalese does not mean he would be exempt from
    interest. GJ refers to 'individuals who are, or are perceived to be,  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state'.

40. Mr Tufan placed heavy reliance on the Fact-Finding  report  but  as  Ms
    Asanovic pointed out this was conducted at a  time  under  a  different
    regime and subsequently Gotabaya  Rajapaksa,  the  brother  of  Mahinda
    Rajapaksa the former president who led Sri Lanka in its defeat  of  the
    Tamil forces in 2009,  has taken over and appointed his brother Mahinda
    as prime minister.  The current situation in Sri Lanka shows  increased
    suspicion and activity of security activity  and  heightened  security.
    The new president Rajapaksa was described as committed  to  reinforcing
    the intelligence service and  increasing  surveillance.   Human  Rights
    Watch  reported  on  16th  February  2020  that  security  forces   and
    intelligence agencies have intensified surveillance and there have been
    threats against families  of  victims  of  enforced  disappearance  and
    activists supporting  them  since  Mr  Rajapaksa  became  president  in
    November 2019.

41.  Even  prior  to  2019,  there  is  evidence  that  tensions  had  been
    increasing.  At the conclusion of his official visit on 14th July 2017,
    the UN Special Rapporteur on human rights and counter-terrorism  stated
    that "any person suspected of association, however  indirect  with  the
    LTTE remains at immediate risk of detention and torture".

42. As pointed out in the Freedom for Torture Report  dated  26th  February
    2020, Sri Lanka under Gotabaya Rajapaksa has withdrawn from  the  Human
    Rights Council resolution which showed  commitment  to  reconciliation,
    accountability and human rights.  The Human Rights Council in a  report
    entitled "Promoting reconciliation, accountability and human rights  in
    Sri Lanka" a report of the UNHCR dated 18th February 2020,  the  report
    at paragraph 34 states that:

         "Very  little  action  has  been  taken   to   remove   individuals
         responsible  for  past  violations,  to  dismantle  structures  and
         practices that have facilitated  torture,  enforced  disappearances
         and extrajudicial killings, and to prevent their  recurrence.   The
         High Commissioner is deeply  concerned  about  the  appointment  of
         several military officers to senior command positions, both  before
         and  after  the  presidential  elections,   despite   the   serious
         allegations  that  troops  under  their  command  committed   gross
         violations of  international  human  rights  and  humanitarian  law
         during the war, as  documented  by  the  United  Nations  Secretary
         General's Panel of Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka  and  the
         OHCHR Investigation on Sri Lanka".

43. GJ at paragraph 262 specifically states that "release  through  payment
    of a bribe was extremely common" and that "release did not  necessarily
    indicate a lack of further adverse interest". It is a preserved finding
    that the appellant was released by payment of a bribe.  In the  context
    of increasing tensions, even within the framework of GJ,  it  might  be
    inherently likely that the authorities would retain an interest in  the
    appellant and do so by issuing an arrest warrant. RS (Sri Lanka) [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1796 held

         "25.     I have no reason to doubt that the sequence of events from
             escape to arrest warrant to stop  list  was  not  specifically
             articulated before the FTT judge.   Further,  I  have  already
             explained that the judge did not have the  Country  of  Origin
             Information Report because of a failure by  the  Secretary  of
             State to draw it to the  court's  attention.   It  also  seems
             likely that the passages from GJ on which RS relies  were  not
             specifically  brought  to  the   judge's   attention   either.
             Notwithstanding these points, I consider that  the  FTT  judge
             made an error of law.  In looking for positive reasons to find
             that an arrest warrant had been issued, the judge has,  in  my
             judgment, completely overlooked the inherent probabilities  of
             the case.  RS had been arrested  after  the  end  of  the  war
             (although I would accept only shortly after) and  remained  of
             sufficient interest to the authorities to be detained for some
             18 months thereafter during which time he was tortured.   This
             period extended up to  and  beyond  the  commencement  of  the
             release of LTTE detainees.  He had not been released  but  had
             escaped from custody with the help of a  visiting  contractor.
             It seems to me, based on those facts, to be inherently  likely
             that the authorities would seek to recapture him and do so  by
             issuing an arrest warrant".

44. I accept that there are distinctions between the facts in this case and
    that of RS but it is inherently possible that this appellant  is  on  a
    watch list and may be at risk not necessarily at the airport  but  once
    he returns home.  He  states  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have
    visited his family home, which I accept, and that it has been  accepted
    that he was released on a bribe which as Ms Asanovic pointed out is  an
    offence.   As set out in GJ the electronic database  was  available  at
    the airport in Sri Lanka and if a person is on  a  watch  list  on  the
    electronic database they will be allowed to proceed but the authorities
    will be notified.

45. The word significant in relation to LTTE activism has  not  necessarily
    been defined but I note at 4.2.1 of the  Fact-Finding  Report  that  it
    states

    "if returning failed asylum seekers were found to  have  links  to  the
    LTTE they would likely  face  further  questioning  although  it  would
    depend on the case".

46. I was also referred to 4.2.2 of the Fact-Finding Report which stated:

         "The Attorney General's Department and the  Criminal  Investigation
         Department told the FFT that former LTTE cadres would  only  be  of
         interest if there was a pending criminal case against them and that
         mere membership of the LTTE would not  make  someone  of  interest,
         this was also confirmed by an NGO".

47. As Ms Asanovic pointed out the sources for this report, the compilation
    of which predated the ascension of Rajapaksa, were largely anonymous or
    stakeholders.   Such  views  given  by  government  associates   should
    according to Ms Asanovic be taken with a "pinch  of  salt".   There  is
    some force in this argument and that  the  focus  of  the  Fact-Finding
    Mission was also in particular the Transnational  Government  of  Tamil
    Eelam and the government's attitude to that organisation.

48. Indeed, as the Fact-Finding Mission stated on page 6 "all  sources  and
    information provided needs to be  critically  assessed  and  considered
    against  other  publicly  available  material".   That  other  publicly
    available material would indeed include other country material provided
    by the appellant and the extant country guidance.   As  stated  in  the
    methodology section of the FFM "a number of sources  requested  varying
    degrees of anonymity to protect their professional  privacy  and/or  to
    protect their safety".

49. As stated in the Executive Summary of the Fact-Finding report, however,
    "returnees  are  likely  to  be  questioned  by  immigration  officials
    especially where they arrive on  an  emergency  travel  document".   Mr
    Tufan observed that the appellant would  arrive  with  a  passport  and
    therefore would not be of interest but the use of the word 'especially'
    does not preclude the interrogation or questioning of  those  returning
    from abroad and this appellant will return having been out of Sri Lanka
    for over ten years and in the United Kingdom.  It is thus possible that
    he will be questioned and he would not be expected to  lie  if  he  was
    questioned about any previous detentions in relation to  links  to  the
    LTTE.

50. At 1.12 and 1.13  of  the  Fact-Finding  report  it  is  recorded  that
    following the bombings of Easter 2019 intimidation and  monitoring  had
    increased and that several sources noted that whilst a general  feeling
    of more personal freedom prevailed there remained a  fear  that  things
    could change at any time as influenced by the government in  power  and
    "some people were  anxious  about  a  change  of  power  in  the  (then
    forthcoming) November 2019 presidential elections".   The  report  also
    noted,  presumably  added  after  the  authors'  return  following  the
    interviews, that the elections in November saw the return of the  power
    of the Rajapaksa family, some of whom had been  implicated  in  alleged
    war crimes and human rights abuses.

51. In the Fact-Finding report at section 4.1.1 this was said:

         "Returning failed asylum seekers would likely be questioned at  the
         airport by immigration officials and may be passed to the  Criminal
         Investigation Department (CID) based at  the  airport.   CID  would
         make additional checks with the local police in the area where  the
         person claimed to be from.  These checks can take a  long  time  to
         conduct as there is no central police database.  Once  released  it
         is not unusual to experience a further check at home  although  the
         period of monitoring can vary".

    And at 4.1.4 :

         "IOM also noted that claiming asylum aboard is not an  offence  and
         as such when someone returns to Sri Lanka who has been absent for a
         number of  years  or  has  an  expired  visa,  they  would  not  be
         questioned on this and there were no  media  reports  of  returnees
         being interrogated on such grounds.  IOM have some presence at  the
         airport  and  are  based  before  immigration  control  to  receive
         passengers returning on IOM programmes and they stated that in  the
         last  couple  of  years  they  have  not  witnessed   the   intense
         questioning of the past where returnees may have  been  asked  what
         they had been doing in the UK.  The police would only be interested
         in an individual if there were outstanding criminal offences".

52. There are two points to note about this.  First, Ms Asanovic maintained
    that IOM had a very limited mandate in terms  of  monitoring  returnees
    but secondly, as discussed above, it was the appellant's assertion that
    he had escaped detention on a bribe which is indeed a criminal  offence
    and as indicated by RS it is possible  an  arrest  warrant  may  be  in
    existence and thus satisfying thus, on the  lower  standard  of  proof,
    placing him at risk.

53. The Fact-Finding report continued at 4.2:

         "4.2.1   If returned failed asylum seekers were found to have links
                to the LTTE  they  would  likely  face  further  questioning
                although it would depend on the case.   Representative  from
                UNHCR stated that the level of  security  screening  at  the
                airport has decreased since 2015 and that if you are a  high
                profile LTTE cadre you  would  be  subjected  to  additional
                questioning, but this would not necessarily mean  you  would
                be detained.

         4.2.2     The  Attorney  General's  Department  and  the   Criminal
                Investigation Department  told  the  FFT  that  former  LTTE
                cadres would only be of interest  if  there  was  a  pending
                criminal case against them and that mere membership  of  the
                LTTE would not make  someone  of  interest,  this  was  also
                confirmed by an NGO.

         4.2.3    Two sources told the FFT that former LTTE cadres returning
                to Sri Lanka would be able to undergo rehabilitation if they
                requested it, although this would  not  apply  if  they  had
                crimes outstanding".

54. These sections refer to the possibility of questioning if either  links
    to the LTTE were discerned or there were 'crimes outstanding' and  this
    is information from the Attorney General's Department itself.

55. What has to be considered  is  that  it  has  been  accepted  that  the
    appellant has escaped detention, whether formally arrested  or  not  on
    payment of a bribe which is a criminal offence and  possibly  recorded,
    and that it is conceivable that his name would be recorded on  a  watch
    list in which case he may well be intercepted not  necessarily  at  the
    airport but when at home because according to 7.6.1 of the document  of
    the Fact-Finding Mission:

         "According to CID a watch list exists  and  is  maintained  by  the
         police.  Where someone returns to Sri Lanka and is on a watch  list
         they would be arrested if there were outstanding criminal  offences
         against them.  SIS have  their  own  watch  list  and  will  screen
         returning passengers  against  the  list,  where  a  person  is  of
         interest they would be interviewed and handed  to  CID  if  further
         action was needed".

56. Although it was asserted by the Secretary of State that  the  appellant
    had no significant role in the LTTE  even  the  CPIN  acknowledged,  as
    cited above, that those on the 'watch list' 'are persons  that  are  of
    interest to the authorities for  minor  offences  or  are  former  LTTE
    cadres'.

57. It was the appellant's case that  his  family  had  been  harassed  and
    indeed the Fact-Finding report at page 38 identified that "some  family
    members may be harassed if the police are looking for someone  who  has
    fled abroad" and further that arrest receipts are not always issued.

58. I note at page 42 of Fact-Finding report it is stated

       "returning failed asylum  seekers  will  be  questioned  if  they've
       overstayed their visa.  If a person is identified as a failed asylum
       seeker they will be questioned, then passed to CID".

59. Also at page 42, bearing in mind  that  this  appellant  will  need  to
    supply  his  out  of  date  passport  to  the  Sri  Lankan  immigration
    authorities to issue him with a new passport  or  obtain  an  emergency
    travel document, there is confirmation that "Immigration works  closely
    with SIS and shares information".  This clearly relates to  departments
    within Sri Lanka but there is no reason to suppose that the Sri  Lankan
    immigration authorities operating in the United Kingdom would not share
    information with the Sri Lankan government in a similar way.

60. Annex D notes the meetings with sources and ranges from page 33 to  59.
    The Annex notes included a question which stated "Is there  torture  in
    detention?" and the response was:

         "In police custody  ...  They  may  assault  detainees  to  extract
         information even if  they  are  innocent  ...  And  police  custody
         torture is not targeted against any particular group - it's random,
         widespread and across  the  board.   There  is  a  saying  'without
         assault you won't get the truth'".

61. I have considered the evidence in the  round  noting  that  there  were
    hundreds of pages of evidence and have taken into  account  the  recent
    country  guidance  and  Fact-Finding  Report  when  finding  that   the
    appellant albeit Sinhalese would remain at  risk  of  ill-treatment  on
    return to Sri Lanka.  The indications are that  the  authorities  might
    have retained an interest in the appellant owing to his release on  the
    bribe and may have issued an arrest warrant.  His previous detention is
    a possible factor putting him at risk as being on a watch list and  may
    have increased the likelihood of ill-treatment.

62. In all the circumstances and bearing in  mind  the  preserved  findings
    that were made in respect of this appellant, I conclude, in  line  with
    GJ  and  indeed  the  Fact-Finding  report,   despite   some   of   its
    contradictions, that the appellant would indeed be at risk on return to
    Sri Lanka.  I note paragraph 26 of KK (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ  172  not  least  paragraph  26
    which re-states guidance in R (SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 that "decision  makers  and  judges
    are required to take country guidance determinations into account,  and
    to  follow  them  unless  very  strong  grounds,  supported  by  cogent
    evidence, are adduced justifying their not doing so".

63. I am not persuaded that the Fact-Finding  Mission  Report  justifies  a
    departure from the country guidance in GJ, and indeed sections  of  the
    report support reliance on GJ and RS and support the appellant's  claim
    of risk on return,  particularly  when  read  in  conjunction  with  RT
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 such that the appellant would not be expected
    to lie as to his  previous  detention/connection  with  the  LTTE.  The
    appellant's mental health problems may exacerbate  any  engagement  and
    difficulties with authorities at interview.

64. In view of my findings in relation to the protection claim I find  that
    the appellant would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka and  there  would
    be significant obstacles to the appellant's return to the Sri Lanka and
    therefore would allow the appeal on asylum, and on  Article  8  grounds
    accordingly.


Order

Appeal Allowed


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 22nd April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed           Helen Rimington                   Date 22nd April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

