
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12396/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st March 2019                            |On 3rd April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     k j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brooks of Counsel instructed by Central England
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Aziz  made
    following a hearing at Birmingham on 17th April 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 13th  March  1991.   He
    entered the UK clandestinely  on  6th  June  2017  and  claimed  asylum
    thirteen days later.

 3. He said that he had been arrested in 2007 on suspicion that  he  was  a
    member of the LTTE and would be at risk on return.  His sister  LJ  had
    been raped and murdered by a local leader within the EPDP who had  been
    later arrested.  A case had been filed against the leader and  hearings
    began in March 2012.  He and his parents came to court to give evidence
    but were threatened by members of the EPDP.  The appellant was arrested
    and detained in May 2012 and in February 2017 was abducted by  the  CID
    on the instruction of the EPDP.  He was  interrogated  and  accused  of
    being a member of the LTTE.   He  was  able  to  escape  detention  and
    remained in hiding until he was able to flee the country.

 4. The judge accepted that the appellant had  been  arrested  in  December
    2007 but not that any other aspect of his case was true.   He  did  not
    accept that he was related as claimed to the  girl  LJ   nor  that  the
    appellant had been tortured nor that the EPDP would have  any  interest
    in him.  Whilst the judge accepted that  the  medical  evidence  showed
    clear scarring he did not believe that the scarring was the  result  of
    torture as the appellant claimed.   On  that  basis  he  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in his consideration of the evidence and that his credibility
    findings were flawed.  In  particular,  he  had  failed  to  take  into
    account  material  evidence  and  had  fallen   into   error   in   his
    consideration of the evidence by failing to  assess  it  in  the  round
    contrary to the ratio in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] INLR 377.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grant on 15th June  2018  for
    the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

 7. Mr Brooks relied on his grounds and submitted that the appeal needed to
    be reheard.

 8. Mr Tarlow defended the determination arguing that the grounds  amounted
    to a simple disagreement with the decision.

Consideration as to Whether the Judge Erred in Law

 9. I am persuaded that the judge did err for the following reasons.

10. First, the judge had accepted that the appellant had been arrested  and
    detained in 2007 which ought to have formed a part of his assessment of
    whether he would, cumulatively, have been at risk on return.

11. Second, more importantly, the judge erred in his consideration  of  the
    medical evidence.  At paragraph 80 he said that the evidence before the
    Tribunal was weak and the appellant's testimony  was  unreliable.   The
    documentary evidence which  the  appellant  has  sought  to  rely  upon
    contained material discrepancies and was of  limited  probative  value.
    In addition to the documentary evidence, he said  that  he  had   heard
    from the appellant and found that he was not a credible witness.

12. It was only after these conclusions had been  reached  that  the  judge
    considered the medical report.  The appellant had scarring on his  back
    which the doctor found to be highly consistent with  injury  caused  by
    burning from a heated implement.  The doctor said that due to the sight
    and pattern of the  scars  it  was  difficult  to  think  of  plausible
    alternative explanations for their causation other than that they  were
    deliberately inflicted burn injuries.

13. In KV (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] UKSC 10 the  Supreme  Court  held  that
    where there were only two real possibilities; either that KV  had  been
    tortured or that the wounding was self-inflicted.  When it rejected the
    former the original tribunal failed to take into account the fact  that
    self-infliction of wounds is inherently unlikely.

14. The judge therefore erred by not considering the evidence in the  round
    and not considering that self-infliction of wounds is improbable.

15. Moreover there was evidence before the judge which he did not take into
    account at all, in particular, expert evidence  from  Frances  Harrison
    which was not referred to in  the  determination.   This  evidence  was
    potentially helpful to the appellant in a number of ways. Furthermore a
    faxed report was sent to the Tribunal on the day of the hearing from  a
    human  rights  lawyer  and  activist  in  Sri  Lanka   confirming   the
    authenticity of a birth certificate.  According to the  author  of  the
    grounds, who presented the appeal, the document was before the judge at
    the hearing but was not referred to.  There was also a summons  in  the
    appellant's bundle which was not considered.

16. The judge therefore erred in law in failing to take into account all of
    the relevant evidence and in failing to  assess  the  evidence  in  the
    round.  The decision is set aside.  It must be remade by a judge  other
    than Judge Aziz at Birmingham at a date to be notified.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed                              Date 31 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

