








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12185/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Manchester                         |                                   |
|On 18th March 2019                 |On 22nd March 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                               Ms Olamide [S]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Maqsud, International Immigration Advisory
Services

For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hudson promulgated on the 22nd November 2018 whereby the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 and Article 8 of the ECHR.



 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Whilst the proceedings refer to children there is no need to
    directly identify the children in this decision. Having considered  all
    the circumstances I do not consider it necessary to make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Adio on 20th December 2018. Thus the case appeared  before  me
    to determine whether or not there was a material error of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. Despite not being part of the appellant's grounds of appeal  Mr  Maqsud
    sought to argue that previous findings with regard to  asylum  and  the
    risk of FGM should be revisited in  assessing  best  interests  of  the
    children. As pointed out in paragraphs 14 and 15 of the decision  there
    had been a previous decision in  2015,  in  which  the  claims  on  FGM
    grounds had been dismissed, effectively with a finding that  there  was
    no risk of the children of the appellant being  subjected  to  FGM.  Mr
    Maqsud had accepted that there was  no  new  evidence.  The  judge  was
    entitled to follow the approach set  out  in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702 and find that there was no risk of FGM. In any  event  the  issue
    had not been raised in the grounds of appeal.

 5. The argument otherwise on behalf of the appellant started from the fact
    that one of the children of the appellant had been in  the  UK  for  at
    least 7 years and there had therefore to be strong  reasons  justifying
    the removal of the  children.  Mr  Maqsud  was  seeking  to  argue  the
    circumstances were exceptional as the children had  settled  in  school
    and had developed friends both at school and in the local area.

 6. Mr Maqsud also sought to make the point that in 4 months  time  one  of
    the children will have spent 10 years in the UK and having been born in
    the UK the child will be entitled to apply for British citizenship.  Mr
    Maqsud sought to rely upon MT & ET (child's best interest;  ex  tempore
    pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88 (IAC) and the case of MA (Pakistan) & ors
    v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 7. The judge has pointed out that the most recent case of KO  [2018]  UKSC
    53. The judge relies upon the judgement and specifically  paragraph  46
    onwards wherein it is pointed out that whilst the best interests of the
    children are to be considered as a  primary  consideration,  ultimately
    the children best  interest  have  to  be  viewed  in  the  real  world
    including where the parents will be.

 8. Having concluded in KO what the best interests of  the  children  were,
    under article 8 it was still a matter to determine  the  reasonableness
    of the children having to accompany the parents who had no right to  be
    in the United Kingdom. There is reference in paragraph 46  to  a  child
    born in the UK, who clearly had been here for nearly or over 10  years.
    The judgment having acknowledge  that  at  paragraph  51  provides  the
    following conclusion: -

         But in a context where  the  parents  had  to  leave,  the  natural
         expectation would be that the children  would  go  with  them,  and
         there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by the judge to  suggest
         that that would be other than reasonable.

 9. Judge Hudson has considered the case law and the  approach  adopted  is
    consistent with the law as set down in KO.  The  judge  considered  not
    only the circumstances of the appellant but also of her partner, also a
    Nigerian national. They had had no right to remain at  any  stage.  The
    judge concluded that it would be reasonable to expect the  children  to
    reside with the parents in Nigeria and  nothing  in  the  evidence  had
    established that it would be anything other  than  reasonable  for  the
    family to relocate back to Nigeria.

10.  In the circumstances the judge was entitled to come to the conclusions
    that she did. The judge has properly assess the issues in the case  and
    properly applied the guidance given in the case of KO.

11. For the reasons set out there is  no  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

    Notice of Decision

12. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 19th March 2018



