
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12020/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11th July 2019                 |On 20th August 2019               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     RS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, Counsel instructed by Brighton Housing
                    Trust     Immigration Legal Service
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant  from  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lewis, promulgated on the 9th April 2019, to dismiss the
    appeal against the refusal of  his  Protection  Claim.   I  extend  the
    anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The Appellant's Protection Claim  can  conveniently  be  summarised  as
    follows.   He is an Iranian national of Kurdish ethnicity, who grew  up
    in a village located about 7  kilometres  from  Sardasht.  He  did  not
    receive any formal education. He instead helped tend his father's sheep
    from about the age of 8 years. On an  occasion  in  mid-2015,  two  men
    asked him to take an  envelope  to  the  local  community  leader  (the
    'Shura'). However, the  Shura  was  not  at  home  when  the  Appellant
    attended there and so he left the envelope with the Shura's wife before
    returning to  his  flock.  When  the  Shura  opened  the  envelope,  he
    discovered that it contained political materials. The  Shura  therefore
    passed it on to the Revolutionary Guard who, in turn,  went  to  arrest
    the Appellant at his home. The Appellant was still tending his father's
    flock in the hills at the time, and so, on the advice of their  father,
    his brother warned him not to return home. That night, the  Appellant's
    uncle arranged  for  him  to  leave  the  country  and  gave  him  what
    transpired to  be  (unbeknownst  to  the  Appellant)  a  false  Iranian
    identity card. The Appellant entered the UK clandestinely on  the  15th
    August 2015 and claimed asylum. Social Services subsequently  estimated
    his date of birth as the 9th August 2015.

 3.  The  Respondent  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's  claimed   Iranian
    nationality, concluding instead that he is a citizen of Iraq. It was on
    this basis that the  Respondent  concluded  that  the  Appellant  could
    safely relocate  to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  (IKR).  However,  the
    Respondent also considered the plausibility of the Appellant's  account
    of him fleeing Iran in the circumstances he described.  The  Respondent
    concluded that that account was inconsistent  with  background  country
    information, in that it failed to explain why the Iranian Revolutionary
    Guard would not have taken their usual steps (such as taking  a  family
    member as hostage) to ensure that the Appellant was either  apprehended
    or forced to surrender to their custody.

 4. In a careful analysis of the evidence, the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had  substantiated  his  claim  to  be  an  Iranian  national
    [paragraphs 25 to 76]. He was not however satisfied that the  Appellant
    had told the truth about his reasons for leaving Iran. This was because
    the  Appellant  had  given  inconsistent  details  about  his  identity
    (including, but not limited to, producing a  false  identity  document)
    and had sought to conceal the  fact  that  he  had  claimed  asylum  in
    Austria. [paragraphs 77 to 97].

 5. Whilst permission to appeal  would  appear  to  have  been  principally
    granted upon the basis that the Judge had failed to apply the  guidance
    in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018 [UKUT] 00430 to the facts as found (grounds
    2 and 3) Ms Easty's submissions before me focussed upon  her  criticism
    of the reasons the judge gave  for  his  adverse  credibility  findings
    (ground 1). It is this upon that I too shall concentrate.

 6. Ms Easty rightly drew my attention to the fact that the judge had  made
    adverse  credibility  findings  for  which  the  Respondent   had   not
    contended, either when giving  reasons  for  refusing  the  Appellant's
    claim or at the hearing of the appeal. The Respondent's attack upon the
    credibility of the Appellant had been based solely upon his claim to be
    an Iranian national when evidence she relied upon (a  Sprakab  analysis
    of the Appellant's speech) was said to point strongly in favour of  him
    being an Iraqi citizen. However, as Ms Easty  pointed  out,  the  judge
    found in favour of the Appellant upon  that  issue.   The  Respondent's
    alternative position (assuming the Appellant to have substantiated  his
    claim to be a citizen of Iran) was simply that the Appellant's  account
    of the behaviour of the Iranian  Revolutionary  Guard  was  implausible
    given its  apparent  inconsistency  with  relevant  background  country
    information

 7. Ms Easty also criticised individual aspects of the  Judge's  reasoning.
    Those criticisms can conveniently  be  summarised  as  follows.  Whilst
    stating that he had approached the statements made by the Appellant  in
    his Screening Interview with caution, the judge did not in fact do  so.
    This can be demonstrated by the fact that the judge failed to allude to
    the general factors in YL (Rely on SEF)  China [2004] UKAIT 00145  (the
    lack of supplementary questions in a  Screening  Interview  by  way  of
    clarification of earlier replies, together with the likely  fatigue  of
    the claimant) as well as to the fact that  the  Appellant  had  made  a
    statement (dated 11th February 2016) in which he sought to correct  and
    explain some of the  replies  he  had  given  in  his  first  Screening
    Interview (held on the 26th February 2915). The judge  also  failed  to
    give the Appellant and/or his Counsel an  opportunity  to  address  his
    concerns before drawing adverse conclusions from them.  An  example  of
    why this failure was material to the outcome of the appeal can be  seen
    in the judge's approach to the Appellant's recorded reply  to  question
    2.1 of his Screening Interview. The judge interpreted this to mean that
    the Appellant had been unable to recall the name of the  individual  on
    the Identity Card that he had used to travel across Europe  whereas  an
    alternative (and arguably more plausible) interpretation of that  reply
    is that the Appellant was stating that he had been unable to recall the
    name of the police station at which he had handed in his identity card.
    It is clear from paragraph 84 of the judge's  decision  (and  paragraph
    84(iv) in particular) that the judge reached an adverse conclusion that
    was based upon the correctness of his interpretation of the Appellant's
    reply to that question.

 8. For his part, Mr Walker accepted that some of the judge's reasoning was
    questionable. However, he  submitted  that  this  did  not  render  his
    overall conclusion unsafe. I disagree. I am unable with  confidence  to
    say that the outcome of the appeal would have been  the  same  had  the
    judge invited the appellant to explain the perceived anomalies  in  his
    evidence and/or heard submissions  from  his  Counsel  about  them.  It
    therefore seems to me that the decision to dismiss the appeal is indeed
    unsafe.

 9.  Ms  Easty  argued  that  if  I  came  to  this  conclusion,  I  should
    nevertheless preserve the judge's favourable  findings  concerning  the
    Appellant's claimed nationality.  I  disagree  with  this  for  several
    related reasons. As previously noted, the Respondent's attack upon  the
    Appellant's  general  credibility  was  based  solely   upon   evidence
    suggesting that he may not have told the truth about  his  nationality.
    That  issue  cannot  therefore  be  isolated  from   a   more   general
    consideration  of  the  claimed  propensity  of  the  Appellant  to  be
    untruthful. Indeed, whilst it was not specifically raised as  a  ground
    of appeal, it is arguable that the  judge  fell  into  error  precisely
    because he failed to consider the evidence concerning  the  Appellant's
    credibility in the round. It would thus in my view be  quite  wrong  to
    hamstring a  future  factfinder  by  fixing  them  with  mixed  factual
    findings from which they may find it difficult or  even  impossible  to
    reach a logical and properly reasoned conclusion. It must therefore  be
    open to a future factfinder, having applied the appropriate standard of
    proof, either to accept or  reject  the  entirety  of  the  Appellant's
    account, of which his claimed nationality is  an  integral  feature.  I
    therefore conclude that the facts must be determined  afresh  and  that
    the most appropriate course in those  circumstances  is  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for that purpose.

10. The only direction that I give for the future conduct of his appeal  is
    that any further evidence upon which either party may  choose  to  rely
    must be served on the other party and upon the Tribunal not  less  than
    five calendar days before the day the appeal is listed  for  rehearing.
    Any other directions must be a matter for the Resident Judge at  Hatton
    Cross.

Notice of Decision


      1. The appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
         allowed and that decision is set aside.

      2. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
         afresh before any judge other than Judge Lewis.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed

Date: 12th August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

