
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12242/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th July 2017                              |On 12th July 2017             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                   H.K.N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hodson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born [ ] 1985.  He has appealed with
    permission of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew) against a decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 5th January  2017,
    dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision of 24th October
    2016 refusing to grant him asylum/humanitarian protection.

 2. The core of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  asylum  revolves  around  his
    conversion to Christianity.  In summary,  he  claims  he  came  to  the
    attention of the authorities in Iran following an  incident  concerning
    his dog.  The Appellant became embroiled in a scene with the Basiji who
    were seeking to impound the dog.  The appellant who was enraged at this
    started hurling insults  at  the  Basiji  which  were  anti-Islamic  in
    nature.

 3. This resulted in the authorities raiding the Appellant's computer  shop
    and seizing his computer. The difficulty for  the  Appellant  was  that
    prior to the incident with his  dog  the  Appellant  had  expressed  an
    interest in Christianity and certain details relative to this  interest
    were stored on his computer.  So far as  the  Appellant  was  concerned
    therefore the authorities were now  in  possession  of  material  which
    would amount to evidence of apostasy.

 4. He therefore left Iran via Turkey and arrived in  the  UK.   Since  his
    arrival here he has been baptised as a Christian by the Reverend Tutton
    of the Free Church of Hampstead Garden Suburb. The Rev. Tutton attended
    the FtT hearing to give evidence on the Appellant's behalf.

 5. The Respondent disbelieved the Appellant's claim,  firstly  of  why  he
    exited  Iran  and  secondly  his  conversion  to   Christianity.    The
    Respondent considered  that  the  conversion  to  Christianity  was  an
    attempt to bolster a weak claim to asylum.

 6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal and it is right  to  say
    that the judge found himself without the assistance of  the  Respondent
    who did not field a presenting officer at the hearing.  The judge  took
    oral evidence from the Appellant and the Rev. Tutton.

 7. So far as his decision is concerned, having set out the  issues  before
    him and noting the oral evidence, the judge concluded his  decision  by
    making adverse credibility findings on the Appellant in [30]  to  [32].
    With regard to the Reverend Tutton however, although the judge sets out
    his evidence in [24] and [25], there is no analysis  of  this  evidence
    other than to summarise it at [33] under the heading  of  "Findings  of
    Credibility".  The judge went on to dismiss the  appeal  by  saying  at
    [34]:

         "I have to consider whole of the appellant's  evidence  (sic),  the
         fact that I do  not  find  the  appellant's  evidence  credible  or
         consistent with regards to his claimed event in Iran,  he  did  not
         mention the core of his asylum claim in his Screening interview and
         the fact that he was vague and evasive about why he did not mention
         these things at the earliest opportunity, I do not accept that  the
         Appellant has genuinely converted for reasons stated by him (sic)."

    The judge then sums up by saying the following at [35]:

         "I find that the appellant has simply fabricated the whole evidence
         in order to support his application for asylum.  He has changed his
         version of evidence with regards to the incidents in Iran, I cannot
         come to any other conclusion but that the appellant's  story  is  a
         fabrication throughout (sic)."

    The judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

 8. The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal.   He  submitted  grounds
    drafted on his behalf by his representatives.  There are three  grounds
    all concerning the evidence put forward and the conduct of the hearing.



       . The judge's complaint that the Appellant was "vague and evasive" is
         simply  incorrect.   The  judge  kept  repeatedly  questioning  the
         Appellant concerning certain details at his screening interview and
         it is unfair to quantify the Appellant as "vague" simply because he
         kept giving the same answer.

       . The judge rejects the Appellant's account concerning  the  reaction
         of the Basiji to the insults  thrown  at  them  over  the  incident
         concerning the Appellant's dog.  The FtT  enters  into  speculation
         and has misunderstood the position  of  the  Basiji  and  therefore
         wrongly concludes that the Appellant is inconsistent.

       . The judge failed to take the positive evidence of  Reverend  Tutton
         into account adequately or at all when  assessing  the  Appellant's
         core claim to have converted to Christianity.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew.
    The relevant part of the grant of permission is as follows:

    "1.  The Appellant seeks permission  to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
         Decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge MA Khan) promulgated  on
         5th January  2017  whereby  it  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
         against the Respondent's decision to refuse to grant asylum.

    2.    The  core  of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  his   conversion   to
         Christianity.  In the decision the Judge does not  give  sufficient
         reasons for finding the Appellant to be incredible in the claims of
         his conversion and why the evidence of Reverend Ian Tutton does not
         add to the Appellant's credibility of such a conversion.

    3.   I find there is an arguable error of law."

10. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal, arguing:

       . that the FtT  gave  sufficient  reasons  for  finding  against  the
         credibility of the Appellant;

       . that the FtT attaches little weight to the evidence  given  by  the
         Reverend Tutton, but what weight to attach to evidence given  by  a
         witness is one open to the Tribunal Judge.

Error of Law Hearing

11. Mr Hodson appeared for the Appellant and Mr Avery for  the  Respondent.
    At the start of the hearing I indicated to  both  representatives  that
    having read the papers, my preliminary view was that it  was  difficult
    to see that there were sufficient reasons given  for  the  FtT  Judge's
    finding that the Appellant's claim of his  conversion  to  Christianity
    was wholly fabricated. This was on  the  basis  that  I  could  see  no
    meaningful analysis of the Rev. Tutton's evidence.   I  also  expressed
    concern at my reading of [21].  It could be perceived  that  the  judge
    had closed his mind to evidence when  he  stepped  in  and  repeated  a
    question several times despite  getting  the  same  answer  each  time.
    Whilst it is perfectly proper for a judge to seek to clarify a  matter,
    it could be  perceived  as  unsatisfactory  to  repeatedly  question  a
    witness when the same response is elicited.  I asked Mr Avery therefore
    to address me in the light of these indications.

12. Mr Avery's submissions were succinct.  He submitted that the judge  had
    considered all the elements of the  appeal  and  had  made  an  overall
    sustainable decision.  The weight of any piece of evidence was a matter
    for the judge and the decision should therefore stand.

13. At the end of Mr Avery's submissions I heard briefly  from  Mr  Hodson,
    following which I announced my decision that I was satisfied that Judge
    Khan's decision contained error  requiring  it  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

14. My principal reason for this finding is in line with the concise  grant
    of permission.  It has always been a core part of the Appellant's claim
    that he has converted to Christianity.  In my judgment the  questioning
    by the  judge  around  the  apparent  inconsistency  in  the  screening
    interview means that the judge  closed  his  mind  to  other  available
    evidence.  For example he makes no assessment of the positive  evidence
    in the Appellant's interview wherein he demonstrated  that  he  clearly
    had knowledge of the Christian religion.

15. Equally I am satisfied that sufficient reasons have not been  shown  as
    to why the judge overlooked relevant evidence, nor why the evidence  of
    the Rev. Tutton does not add to  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    claimed conversion.  Those omissions are clearly material and I find no
    alternative but to set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    M A Khan and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a full and
    fresh hearing.  Nothing can be preserved from Judge Khan's decision.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge M A Khan promulgated on 5th  January  2017  is  hereby
set aside.  The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not  Judge  M
A Khan) for a fresh rehearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     12 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


