
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/12750/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 July 2017                          | On 11 September 2017             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     AN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. P. Yong, Counsel, instructed by Davies,
Blunden & Evans
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Cameron, promulgated on 13 January  2017,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to grant asylum.


  2. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "In relation to ground three, although the recitation of  the  evidence
     elsewhere in the Decision suggests that the  Judge  was  aware  of  the
     relevant chronology, it is arguable that the Judge erred at [78] of the
     Decision in his finding that the Appellant would not have  returned  to
     Pakistan in 2015 if there  were  a  fatwah  against  him.   It  is  the
     Appellant's case that he was unaware of the fatwah at the time  of  his
     return.  That error may not be material when assessed  with  the  other
     credibility findings but is arguably so at this stage.


     The other two grounds are weaker and may amount to a mere  disagreement
     with the findings.  However, I do not limit the grant of permission."


  4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   Both  representatives  made  oral
     submissions following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


  5. Miss. Yong submitted that the judge had found that there was a lack  of
     corroborative medical evidence, but there was a Rule 35 report  showing
     scarring.  The Rule 35 report showed that the Appellant was a victim of
     torture but the judge  had  placed  no  weight  on  this  corroborative
     evidence.  She submitted that this was particularly  pertinent  as  the
     judge had found  that  the  Appellant  was  consistent,  in  particular
     regarding his arrest and detention in 2014.


  6. In paragraph 68 the judge had found that the Appellant's  evidence  was
     consistent but not truthful.  She submitted that the judge  had  raised
     the threshold and gone beyond the lower standard of  proof  applicable.
     There was sufficient evidence to find that the Appellant was at risk.


  7. At Q60 of his asylum  interview  the  Appellant  had  stated  that  the
     military hospital did not give him a receipt.   The  military  hospital
     worked under the Pakistani authorities.  The Appellant had  been  clear
     at the first stage of his asylum claim that he could not even obtain  a
     receipt from the hospital, so it was unlikely that he was going  to  be
     able to obtain any  further  evidence  of  treatment  received  at  the
     hospital.  The judge had found that the Appellant was detained  by  the
     Pakistani authorities.  The Appellant's claim was that they  would  not
     even issue a receipt, let alone  give  him  medical  records.   It  was
     impossible for the Appellant to get such evidence and in  requiring  it
     the judge had raised the threshold of the burden of proof.


  8. In relation to ground 2 the judge had found that the  Appellant  was  a
     member of UKPNP [67] and that there was evidence that  the  authorities
     would take action against members of this organisation.


  9. At [75] and [81] the judge stated that there was no background evidence
     to show that the position in Pakistan had improved, and that there were
     fewer attacks in 2014.  However, there had  been  evidence  before  the
     judge that there had been fewer attacks in  Kashmir  in  2014.   I  was
     referred to the EASO Country of  Origin  Information  Report  Pakistan,
     August 2015 paragraph 2.6 (page 177 of the Appellant's  bundle).   This
     states that there were very few attacks in AK in 2014,  although  there
     were occasional cross-border attacks along the line of control.  AK was
     the Appellant's area.


 10. In relation to ground 3 she accepted that the findings in paragraph  78
     referred not  to  the  Appellant's  return  to  Pakistan,  but  to  the
     Appellant's failure to claim asylum on return to the United Kingdom  in
     September 2015.  However, she said that the fatwah was in  the  judge's
     mind and he had not rejected the fatwah outright.  She  submitted  that
     the judge had come to the conclusion that the fatwah was  not  reliable
     based on his other credibility findings.  She referred  to  the  letter
     from the advocate who had gone to obtain the fatwah  (page  37  of  the
     Appellant's bundle).  No consideration had been given to this document,
     and the judge had not stated why he had rejected the  evidence  of  the
     advocate.


 11. Significant documentary evidence had not been considered by the  judge.
     Although there was no formal psychiatric report, there was  a  Rule  35
     report.  The Appellant had been found to be consistent throughout.  The
     judge had raised the  legal  burden  of  proof  and  had  rejected  the
     credibility of the Appellant due to a  lack  of  corroborative  medical
     evidence although there was a Rule 35 report.


 12. In relation to the 2014 arrest, the Appellant  had  said  at  interview
     that this was a random arrest.  He had not relied on an interpreter  at
     his interview and this had not been considered  by  the  judge.   Miss.
     Yong  submitted  that  it  was  not  rational  to  find  the  Appellant
     consistent and to find that he was a member of the UKPNP, but  then  to
     reject his asylum claim.  Section 8  was  only  one  factor.   Specific
     documentary evidence had not been rejected by the judge.


 13. Mr. Wilding relied on the Rule 24 report.  He submitted that there  was
     no material error of  law  in  the  decision.   The  case  advanced  in
     submissions relied on the failure to  take  the  Rule  35  report  into
     account, but no complaint had been made in the grounds that  there  had
     been a failure to take medical evidence  into  account.   The  skeleton
     argument before the First-tier Tribunal had not relied on the  Rule  35
     report.


 14.  In  relation  to  ground  1,  this  was  an  attack  on  the   judge's
     misunderstanding of the military hospital.  There had been no challenge
     in ground 1 to  a  failure  to  consider  the  medical  evidence.   The
     decision was thorough.  There was a comprehensive set  of  findings  at
     [31] to [86].  Mr. Wilding took issue with Miss. Yong's summary of  the
     decision -  the  judge  had  not  found  the  Appellant  to  have  been
     consistent.  Paragraph 68 was not a finding of consistency, and  not  a
     finding as to the Appellant's credibility.  He submitted  that  it  was
     possible to be consistent about something which is a lie  or  something
     which is the truth as equally as it was  possible  to  be  inconsistent
     about it.  The comments regarding the Appellant's consistency  did  not
     equate to a credibility finding.


 15. The grounds were no more than a disagreement with the findings  of  the
     judge.  In the grant of permission the judge noted that  the  strongest
     point was in relation to [78].   However,  it  was  accepted  that  the
     finding at paragraph [78] was not about return to Pakistan but referred
     to the Appellant's failure to claim asylum  on  return  to  the  United
     Kingdom when he knew that there was a threat.  This finding was open to
     the judge.  There was no misunderstanding  as  to  the  timing  of  the
     fatwah.


 16. While accepting that the grant of permission had not been limited,  Mr.
     Wilding pointed out that the judge granting permission  was  not  taken
     with grounds 1 or 2.  Although the First-tier Tribunal judge had  noted
     the consistency of the evidence, he had not accepted a  great  deal  of
     the Appellant's evidence.  The Appellant  had  been  coming  and  going
     between  the  United  Kingdom  and  Pakistan.   In  relation   to   the
     application to adduce further evidence under Rule 15, this did  not  go
     to the heart of the Appellant's narrative, which is what the judge  had
     been assessing.  There had been no hospital reports from Pakistan,  but
     equally there had been no medical  evidence  from  the  United  Kingdom
     apart from the Rule 35 report.  There was no material error of law.


 17. In response Miss. Yong submitted that the failure to consider the  Rule
     35 report fell within ground 1, a failure  to  take  into  account  key
     evidence when making adverse credibility findings.  The failure to take
     into account the Rule 35  report  clearly  fell  into  ground  1.   All
     medical evidence had to be taken into account.  She accepted  that  the
     Rule 35 report had not been separately pleaded but the  judge  had  not
     made a finding of fact about the Appellant's detention in 2003.


 18. She submitted that paragraph 68 contained very  strong  findings  which
     were sufficient credibility findings.  The judge  had  found  that  the
     Appellant had been consistent throughout.  He had then found a way  out
     from making a finding that the  Appellant  was  at  risk  despite  this
     finding of consistency, relying on the fact that there was no  hospital
     report provided in relation to his treatment.  He had made this finding
     without looking at the other documentary evidence which was before him.
      It was difficult to obtain medical records from abroad, let alone from
     a  Pakistan  military  hospital.   The  Appellant  had   provided   all
     documentary evidence as soon as possible where this was feasible.


 19. There had been no real challenge to the advocate's letter.  There was a
     flawed basis for the judge's credibility finding.   The  Appellant  was
     found to have scarring in the Rule 35  report.   The  judge  placed  no
     weight on this report simply because there was no  psychiatric  report.
     The Rule 35 report further corroborated the Appellant's  account.   The
     judge had made positive  credibility  findings  about  his  arrest  and
     detention in 2014.  The  Appellant  had  been  involved  in  sur  place
     activities.  He was at risk.


Error of Law Decision


 20. I will start by dealing with ground 3.   As  accepted  by  Miss.  Yong,
     paragraph 78 does not refer to the Appellant's return to Pakistan  when
     he knew there was a fatwah against him, but refers to  the  Appellant's
     failure to claim asylum on return to the United  Kingdom  in  September
     2015, when he claimed to know that there was a fatwah against him.  The
     judge has not misunderstood the timing of the fatwah.   The  judge  has
     made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  on  the  basis  that,   having
     discovered that there was a fatwah against him, the Appellant  did  not
     claim asylum on return to the United Kingdom.  There is no error of law
     in paragraph 78.  This finding was open to the judge.


 21. Ground 3 does not refer to any failure of the judge to make  a  finding
     as to the fatwah.  There is no misdirection in paragraph 78 and  it  is
     only on this apparent misdirection that ground 3 relies.  The issue  of
     whether or not the judge made  findings  about  the  existence  of  the
     fatwah falls into ground 1.


 22. I accept Mr. Wilding's point that the case advanced before  me  was  in
     some ways rather different to that advanced in the grounds  of  appeal.
     However, the first ground of appeal is that the judge  failed  to  take
     into account key evidence  when  making  adverse  credibility  findings
     against the Appellant.  Unfortunately, what follows does not completely
     back up this ground.  However, the grounds are not  limited,  and  they
     raise the issue of the failure to take into account  key  evidence.   I
     will therefore deal with the issues raised by Miss. Yong.


 23. Miss. Yong submitted that the judge had not taken into account the Rule
     35 report and the advocate's  letter.   The  advocate's  letter  is  in
     relation to the fatwah.  I  have  carefully  considered  the  decision.
     There is no clear finding as to whether or not a fatwah has been  taken
     out against the Appellant.  In paragraph [44] the judge refers  to  the
     fatwah, but this is not a finding, but is merely a  recounting  of  the
     Appellant's evidence (as is the case for paragraphs [31] to [63]).   He
     refers to the letter from the advocate at [62], but again there  is  no
     finding and the judge simply sets out the contents of the letter.


 24. The findings are set out from [66] onwards.  The only references to the
     fatwah in paragraphs [66] to [86] are at [76] to [78]  in  relation  to
     section 8.  However,  as  set  out  above,  this  is  relevant  to  the
     Appellant's failure to claim asylum when he claimed to know that  there
     was a fatwah against him.  There is reference in [79] to  the  copy  of
     the fatwah, but no  finding  that  it  can  be  relied  on.   The  main
     paragraph where the judge purports to deal with  the  fatwah  is  [83].
     However there is no finding as to whether or not the  fatwah  has  been
     issued, and there is no reference to the letter from the advocate.   In
     fact, although the paragraph starts "with regard to the  issue  of  the
     Fatwa", it does not proceed to consider the issuing of  the  fatwah  in
     any detail.


 25. At [84] the judge concludes that he cannot place weight on the  fatwah,
     but again, this is not with  any  reference  to  the  letter  from  the
     advocate, but is due to the fact that  he  does  not  accept  that  the
     Appellant was detained "given the lack of medical  evidence  available"
     and because the  Appellant  returned  in  September  2015.   The  judge
     rejects the fatwah because he rejects the claim that the Appellant  was
     detained.  He does not consider the evidence  of  how  the  fatwah  was
     obtained when concluding that the fatwah cannot be relied on.  In  [85]
     he finds that the Appellant has not shown even to the lower standard of
     proof that a fatwah has been issued as he does not find the Appellant's
     account to be credible.  I find that there is a failure  to  take  into
     account all relevant evidence connected to the fatwah.


 26. The judge's rejection of the fatwah  is  directly  connected  with  his
     rejection of  the  medical  evidence.   In  relation  to  this  medical
     evidence, in paragraph 79 the judge states:


     "The only medical evidence provided by the  appellant  is  a  detention
     service order under rule 35.  It  is  relevant  to  note  that  in  his
     witness statement dated 18 September 2016 at paragraph 19 he refers  to
     the fact that this suggests that he is suffering post-trauma.   I  take
     note that there  is  no  formal  psychiatric  or  psychological  report
     provided to support this contention."


 27. Paragraph 80 states:


     "I accept that an appellant is not required  to  provide  corroboration
     however where documents could be obtained then it is expected that  the
     appellant would make some attempt to do so.  He has provided  a  number
     of documents in relation to his membership of the party and also a copy
     of the Fatwa he states was issued against him.  There is no explanation
     as to why the  appellant  has  not  provided  any  medical  reports  in
     connection with his mistreatment in 2014 in particular  in  a  hospital
     report given that he states he was in hospital for two weeks.  Even  if
     it were a case that the authorities could put pressure on the  hospital
     not to indicate that he was there because he was the victim of  torture
     there should be some record that he was at least at  the  hospital  for
     those two weeks."


 28. The judge accepts that corroboration is not necessary, but then  states
     that he would have expected some  medical  evidence  to  be  have  been
     provided from the hospital in Pakistan.  Further, he does not  consider
     all of the evidence in the round as he gives no  consideration  to  the
     content  of  the  Rule  35  report.   This  was  corroborative  of  the
     Appellant's claim.  While the  report  is  referred  to,  there  is  no
     reference to what is in it.  The judge has evidence  before  him  which
     supports the  Appellant's  account,  yet  he  does  not  refer  to  its
     contents.  Instead he places weight on the fact that the Appellant  has
     not provided evidence from the hospital in Pakistan.   The  Appellant's
     evidence at his asylum interview was that he was not able even to get a
     receipt from  the  hospital  to  show  his  attendance.   There  is  no
     reference to this evidence when the judge finds  that  the  lack  of  a
     medical report from the hospital in Pakistan  damages  the  Appellant's
     credibility.  He also makes reference to the lack of formal psychiatric
     or psychological report [79].


 29. I find that the judge has failed to  take  all  of  the  evidence  into
     account when coming to  his  findings.   I  find  that  he  has  failed
     properly to consider all of the evidence, including the letter from the
     advocate and the Rule 35 report.  The main reason given  for  rejecting
     the claim that he was  detained  was  the  lack  of  medical  evidence,
     despite finding that the Appellant's evidence in  connection  with  his
     detention "has been consistent throughout" [68].  Nevertheless, despite
     making this finding, the account is rejected due to no hospital reports
     being provided.


 30. While the judge accepts that an appellant is not  required  to  provide
     corroboration, effectively this is what he does.  He gives no weight to
     the fact that the Appellant's account has been consistent  due  to  the
     failure to provide corroborative evidence.


 31. The judge accepts that the Appellant is a member of UKPNP, and that  he
     has "taken part in some activities in this  country"  [84].   He  finds
     that  the  authorities  have  taken  action  against  the  UKPNP  [67].
     However, he does not consider separately the Appellant's risk on return
     on account of this membership.  Having found that the Appellant  was  a
     member of a group against whom action had been taken by  the  Pakistani
     authorities, it was necessary to assess  the  risk  on  return  to  the
     Appellant.  At [83] he finds that the Appellant's activities in the  UK
     would not have brought him to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  in
     Pakistan, but he does not give reasons for this finding.


 32. I find that the failure to consider the risk on return to the Appellant
     on account of his membership of the UKPNP is a material error of law.


 33. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
     necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
     overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
     to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


 34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  No findings  are
     preserved.


 35. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 8 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



