
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/12114/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 July 2019                         |On 08 August 2019                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     A A
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Johnrose, Lei Dat & Baig solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a male citizen of Yemen, appeals against the decision of
    the  Secretary  of  State  did  27  October  2017  refuses  claim   for
    international protection. But decision promulgated on 25 March 2019,  I
    found that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  such  that  its
    decision fell to be set aside. My reasons were as follows:

    1.   The appellant is a citizen of Yemen and  was  born  on  1  January
    1983. He appealed against a decision dated 27 October  2017  to  refuse
    his claim for international protection. The first-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Siddiqui), in a decision promulgated on 5  March  2018,  dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellant,  with  permission,  now  appeals  to  the  upper
    Tribunal.

    2.   The only issue argued before the Upper  Tribunal  at  the  initial
    hearing was that of the internal flight alternative. The judge  [40-41]
    found that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant  to  live  in
    Aden. However, as the grant of appeal states 'there is no reference  to
    him being from the North with any potential associated risk factors  or
    to him having no family or social ties in  Aden.'  Further,  the  judge
    also  considered  whether  there  would  be  quotes  very   significant
    obstacles quotes to the appellant reintegrating in Aden society, having
    no family or social ties in the north of that  country.  The  level  of
    violence in  that  part  of  Aden  may  not  cross  the  threshold  for
    humanitarian protection  but  was  still  a  factor  in  assessing  the
    existence of obstacles to the appellant's return under Article 8 ECHR.

    3.   Mr McVeety, who appeared for the Secretary of State,  acknowledged
    that the decision of the  judge  in  respect  of  the  internal  flight
    alternative was flawed. I agree. I find that the judge has carried  out
    an insufficient analysis of factors which are highly  relevant  to  the
    question of internal flight and also to reintegration. To that  extent,
    but his decision but  will  the  need  to  be  reviewed  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

    4.   It is fair to say that  the  first-tier  Tribunal  judge  did  not
    accept any part of the appellant's account as credible but proceeded to
    determine the appeal by reference to internal flight. At [37] he  wrote
    that 'in the asylum decision, it appears  to  been  accepted  that  the
    appellant could not return to his home area but it is suggested that he
    could relate  relocate  to  Aden.'  Before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  both
    representatives submitted that internal flight remains the  only  issue
    which requires determination. The resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal
    will, in those circumstances,  deal  only  with  internal  flight;  the
    hearing will proceed on the basis  that  the  appellant  cannot  return
    safely to his home area of  Yemen.  Both  parties  may  add  use  fresh
    evidence provided they file that evidence at the Tribunal and serve  it
    on the other party no less than 10 days prior to the resumed hearing.

    Notice of Decision

    5.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  5  March
    2018 is set aside. The  findings  of  fact  are  preserved  save  those
    concerning the internal flight alternative.  The  Upper  Tribunal  will
    remake the decision following a resumed hearing on a date to  be  fixed
    at Manchester before Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

 2. At the resumed hearing, Mr Tan,  who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
    State, produced a copy of the CPIN for Yemen  dated  January  2019.  He
    drew my attention to paragraph 2.3.12 which states that,  'humanitarian
    conditions in the country are likely, in most cases, to breach  Article
    15 (b) of the Qualification Directive.' In addition, at 2.4.3 one reads
    that 'it is not reasonable for a person to relocate  to  an  area  that
    engages Articles 15 (b) and (c) of the  Qualification  Directive.'  The
    light of this background evidence, Mr Tan did not seek  to  oppose  the
    appeal.

 3. I am grateful to both Mr Tan and Ms  Johnrose,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, for their assistance in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 27 October 2017 is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

Signed                              Date 29 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
