
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12439/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 26 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     W B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Cheng, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant in this appeal is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born  on
    11 January 1961.  She appeals with the  permission  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Bowler
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the respondent to  refuse
    her protection claim, dated 15 October 2018.

 2. The background to the appeal is  as  follows.   The  appellant  claimed
    asylum on 8 March 2018, a few weeks after her visit visa  expired.  She
    said she was a Shia Muslim and her husband had been a prominent  member
    of the community such that threats were received from  extremist  Sunni
    groups. The appellant's home  was  attacked  in  2016  and,  while  the
    appellant was visiting her family in the United Kingdom, the house  was
    burned down. Her husband died in the fire.

 3. The appellant's claim was rejected by the respondent  for  reasons  set
    out in a reasons  for  refusal  letter,  dated  15  October  2018.  The
    respondent accepted the appellant was a national of Pakistan  and  that
    her religion was Shia Muslim. However, the respondent  did  not  accept
    that the appellant had given an accurate account  of  the  difficulties
    she faced in Pakistan.

 4. The appeal was heard by Judge Bowler  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross.   The
    appellant pursued her protection claim and also  argued  that  removing
    her would breach Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention.  The  judge
    heard oral evidence from the appellant and her three adult children who
    reside in the United Kingdom. Having done so, the judge concluded  that
    the appellant's account of the attack on her  house  in  2016  and  the
    burning down of her house in with  her  husband  in  it  in  2017  were
    fabrications. She went on to consider the risk to the  appellant  as  a
    Shia and found her circumstances did not give rise  to  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution. She was not at risk on return as a lone  woman  or
    if she returned to her husband. She also found no breach of Article  8.
    The appeal was therefore dismissed.

 5. First-tier Tribunal L Murray granted permission stating as follows:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal has failed  to  engage
         with the Appellant's assertion that she  would  be  at  risk  as  a
         result of her husband's position in the TNFJ[1]  and  the  expert's
         evidence in regard to the risk to him and her as a  result.  Whilst
         the other grounds are less arguable I do not refuse permission ..."

 6. The respondent has not filed a Rule 24 response.

 7. I heard oral submissions from the representatives as to  whether  Judge
    Bowler's decision contains material errors of law such that  it  should
    be set aside and remade.

 8. For the appellant, Mr Cheng made four points. Firstly, he  argued  that
    the judge erred by failing to make any findings about the risk  to  the
    appellant, not simply on the basis that she is Shia, but as a member of
    the TNFJ and the wife of a leading member.  The  judge  had  not  taken
    account of the report of Dr Farhaan Wali,  who  had  given  his  expert
    opinion on the risks.

 9. Secondly, the judge  erred  when  assessing  whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration in  Pakistan  by
    wrongly interpreting the medical  report  of  Dr  Mangion  as  "guarded
    evidence". The judge had misapplied the standard of proof.

10. These two grounds are grouped under a challenge described as a  failure
    to consider evidence.

11. Thirdly (ground 2), Mr Cheng argued the judge's characterisation of the
    expert report of Dr Wali as containing "sweeping" statements which were
    unsourced was inaccurate. This ground is described as showing a failure
    to consider background evidence.

12. Permission was also granted on a further point (ground 3), although  Mr
    Cheng did not develop any submissions on it. The  ground,  as  drafted,
    simply argues the judge made irrational findings in not concluding that
    the appellant faced a breach of Article 2 or  3  given  the  weight  of
    medical evidence showing she depended on support "for her survival" and
    would suffer deterioration in her condition without treatment.

13. Ms Pal argued the decision does not contain any material errors of law.
    Although the judge did not make express findings  about  risks  arising
    from any link to the TNFJ, this was part and parcel of her rejection of
    the asylum claim. The judge was entitled to find  the  appellant  would
    not be at risk. The  judge's  treatment  of  the  expert  evidence  was
    adequate. The report of Dr Wali was  not  well  sourced.   The  medical
    evidence did not reach the high threshold required, as confirmed by the
    Court of Appeal in SSHD v PF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 1139. The  judge
    had also clearly addressed paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration
    Rules correctly.

14. Mr Cheng replied briefly, reiterating his first three points.

15. I find no error of law in Judge Bowler's decision,  which  stands.  The
    decision is thorough and well-reasoned. The judge  reached  sustainable
    conclusions on the available evidence.

16. It is true the judge did not make a specific finding regarding  whether
    she accepted the appellant's husband is or was a  prominent  figure  in
    the TNFJ, which the appellant describes in her witness statement  as  a
    "sect" of Shi'ism, but which is better described as an organisation[2].
    The judge's express finding is a total  rejection  of  the  appellant's
    account of her family experiencing  problems  at  the  hands  of  Sunni
    extremists.  She  went  on  to  find  there  was  no  generic  risk  of
    persecution simply on account of being Shia.

17. It is also true that Dr Wali expressed a view in his  report  that  the
    appellant's husband's role as president of the Gujrat branch would make
    the family high profile targets for Sunni militant groups[3].

18. The question is  whether  this  represents  a  lacuna  in  the  judge's
    consideration of the appeal, as Mr Cheng argued. I  find  not.  In  the
    first place, I regard the findings made by the judge are sufficient  to
    dispose of the entirety of  the  protection  claim.  She  rejected  the
    totality of the account put forward by the appellant and  her  children
    for sustainable reasons. I find it implicit from  this  that  she  also
    rejected the claim that the appellant's husband was a prominent  member
    of the TNFJ.

19. However, even if I were  wrong  about  that,  the  consequence  of  the
    judge's rejection of the claim that the family were  harassed  at  all,
    let alone subjected to shootings, arson and murder,  is  that  whatever
    profile the appellant's husband had, it  was  not  sufficient  to  draw
    hostility from Sunni militants. The appellant was 56 when  she  arrived
    in the United Kingdom. She had lived safely in Pakistan for  all  those
    years, voluntarily returning to Pakistan after each of the many  visits
    she made to the United Kingdom.

20. As for Dr Wali's report, the judge gave reasons for giving his opinions
    little weight in respect of certain matters, such as his opinion on the
    authenticity of a newspaper article[4]. In my judgment, the sections of
    the report which concern the risks to the appellant as a member of  the
    TNFJ are concerned, I do not consider the judge could conceivably  have
    attached weight to them either. The  only  references  I  can  find  to
    attacks on TNFJ members consist of two shootings, both in 2008[5].  The
    reference  to  "multiple  reports  of  law  enforcement  and  pro-Sunni
    militant violence towards the TNFJ" is completely unsourced[6].

21. It can be seen that I was not swayed by Mr Cheng's attempt to  convince
    me that Dr Wali's report is well-sourced, such that Judge Bowler  erred
    in finding otherwise. Her general comments on the report  is  found  at
    paragraph 66 of her decision. I find her observations are accurate  and
    I do not consider that Mr Cheng was able to demonstrate that the report
    contains sufficient sources such that the judge was wrong  to  conclude
    it was substandard. I agree with Judge Bowler on this point and find no
    error in her assessment.

22. The other points pursued relate to the appellant's claim under  Article
    8. I note the judge gave thorough treatment to  the  Article  8  claim,
    looking first to the private life provisions of the rules and  then  to
    wider considerations outside the rules.

23.  Dr  David  Mangion  is  a  consultant   physician   and   geriatrician
    specialising in  stroke  medicine.  He  read  the  appellant's  medical
    records and examined her.  He  found,  among  other  things,  that  the
    appellant's limbs are swollen and she has joint pains. She has features
    of severe obesity. She has limited mobility. She has a  combination  of
    lipoedema and lympho-venous oedema.

24. Judge Bowler noted the contents of the  report.  Mr  Cheng's  criticism
    arose from paragraph 83 of the decision where the judge stated that  Dr
    Mangion's opinion  that  the  likelihood  of  replicating  the  current
    medical support given to the appellant in Pakistan was uncertain and it
    may be difficult to access treatment for future skin  infections  which
    are likely to occur. At paragraph  84,  the  judge  said  Dr  Mangion's
    opinions were "guarded and reserved statements". Mr Cheng  argued  that
    the judge's  approach  was  erroneous  because  her  criticism  of  the
    report's findings showed that she was demanding evidence to a  standard
    higher than a balance of probabilities.

25. I see no material error in the judge's approach. Firstly, I do not read
    the judge's  decision  as  imposing  too  high  a  standard  of  proof.
    Secondly, it was for the judge to assess the evidence and her  concerns
    about it are rational. Thirdly, it  must  be  remembered  that,  having
    rejected the claim that the appellant's husband had perished in a fire,
    the judge inferred that he was alive and well and  that  the  appellant
    could simply return home. Care would be provided to her.

26. Furthermore, it is clear that the claim was being put  forward  on  the
    basis that there were very significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    reintegration in Pakistan. The judge acknowledged the appellant  has  a
    number of health conditions which affect her mobility  and  ability  to
    look after herself. If she is unable to lose weight, her  prognosis  is
    poor. However, these matters are not an obstacle to  reintegration,  as
    such. The test has been explained definitively by Sales LJ in SSHD v AK
    (Sierra Leone) [2016] EWCA Civ 813 as follows:

         "... a broad evaluative judgment to  be  made  as  to  whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life."

27. The judge's approach is sound.

28. As Mr Cheng made no submissions on the final ground, I can deal with it
    very shortly. It has no merit. According to the judge's summary of  the
    appellant's case, as put forward by counsel, she did not pursue Article
    3 on health grounds so the  judge  cannot  have  erred  by  failing  to
    consider it. In any event, it is  plain  that  the  appellant's  health
    conditions do not put her anywhere near the  high  threshold  of  "very
    exceptional circumstances", described in  N  v  SSHD  [2005]  UKHL  31,
    confirmed in PF (Nigeria).

Notice of Decision

29. For these reasons the appellant's appeal is dismissed and the  decision
    of Judge Bowler dismissing her appeal on all grounds shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 18 July 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
-----------------------
[1] Tehrik-e-Nifaz-e-Fiqha-e-Jafaria.
[2] See paragraphs 28-30 of Dr Wali's report.
[3] See paragraphs 32, 55, 85 and 97 of Dr Wali's report.
[4] See paragraphs 54 - 56 of the judge's decision.
[5] See paragraph 31 of Dr Wali's report.
[6] See paragraph 88 of Dr Wali's report

