
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12477/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Edinburgh George   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 19 March 2020                     |On 27 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                   Mr m r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Winter, Counsel instructed by Latta & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  C
    McManus promulgated on  9  January  2019.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray on 5 February 2019  and  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on 3 April 2019.  Thereafter an application
    was made to the Court of Session to challenge the decision  by  way  of
    judicial review.  On 7 January 2020, Lady Wise granted the petition  in
    terms of the Joint Minute for the parties. The decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal dated 3 April 2019 was reduced and the matter was remitted  to
    the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration of the  appellant's  application
    for permission to appeal.  In a decision dated 22  January  2020,  Vice
    President of the Upper Tribunal C M G Ockelton  granted  permission  to
    appeal in the light of the interlocutor and the joint  minute  in  this
    case.

Anonymity

 2. I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013,  No  1.  concerned  with  anonymity
    orders and I observe that  the  starting  point  for  consideration  of
    anonymity orders in this Chamber of the Upper Tribunal is open justice.
    However, I note paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where it is confirmed
    that it is the present practice of both the  First  tier  Tribunal  and
    this Tribunal that an  anonymity  direction  is  made  in  all  appeals
    raising asylum or other international protection  claims.  Pursuant  to
    Rule 14 of the 2008 Procedure rules I make an anonymity direction.

Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Iran who entered the United Kingdom on 7
    April 2011.  He initially claimed asylum based  on  his  conversion  to
    Christianity as well as the  fact  that  he  had  left  Iran  illegally
    without undertaking military service.  Those claims were refused and an
    appeal against the refusal was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 9
    September 2011.  Thereafter, the appellant lodged submissions  in  2016
    providing further evidence of his Christian conversion.  The respondent
    refused to accept these as a fresh  claim.  A  second  set  of  further
    submissions  was  lodged  on  31  July  2018.  These   reiterated   the
    appellant's claim that he was a Christian convert.  On 8  October  2018
    the respondent accepted that the  further  submissions  amounted  to  a
    fresh claim but decided to refuse the claim for protection. This is the
    decision under appeal.

 4. The basis of the appellant's most recent protection claim was  that  he
    is a genuine Christian convert who is at risk of serious harm by virtue
    of his 'sur place' activities in the United Kingdom.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge found that the appellant was not a genuine Christian  convert
    who was at real risk of persecution  on  return  to  Iran.   The  judge
    accepted that the appellant had previously attended a  Catholic  Church
    and more recently attended Victory Christian Centre  and  that  he  had
    been baptised in the United Kingdom.  The judge was not satisfied  that
    the appellant had been engaged in evangelical outreach  activities  and
    found, having considered all of the evidence, that the appellant  would
    not come to the attention of the authorities in Iran having  regard  to
    SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008]  UKAIT  0082.  The
    judge found in the alternative that the appellant could live discreetly
    in Iran if he were a genuine Christian convert.   In  this  respect  he
    relied on HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 3.  Additionally,  there  would  be  no
    risk to him of returning as a failed asylum seeker further to  SSH  and
    HR (illegal exit: failed asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308
    (IAC).

The Grounds of Appeal

 6. The main ground of appeal is that the judge failed to make findings  on
    a material issue; namely whether the appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm on arrival at the airport in Iran. It  is  submitted  that
    the judge accepted that the  Iranian  authorities  would  question  the
    appellant about his activities in the United Kingdom at the airport and
    that the judge also accepted that he has been attending church and been
    baptised in the UK.  This  would  mean  that  the  Iranian  authorities
    would, at the very least, perceive the appellant as having converted to
    Christianity and potentially place the appellant at risk.  It  is  said
    that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  carry  out  a  proper
    assessment of whether there was a real risk to the appellant.

 7. The respondent did not submit a Rule 24 response.

Decision on Error of Law

 8. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Clark for the respondent conceded that
    there was an error of law in that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    whether there would be any risk to the appellant at the airport on  his
    arrival in Iran, given that it  is  accepted  that  all  returnees  are
    questioned at that stage and he has attended church in the UK.  It  was
    conceded that this ground of appeal had been made out and was  material
    to the outcome of the appeal.

 9. I had had regard to the  latest  country  guidance  case  on  Iran,  PS
    (Christianity - risk) Iran [2020] UKUT 00046 (IAC)  promulgated  on  20
    February 2020 deals with this issue at some  length.  At  [113]  it  is
    said:

    "We are satisfied that a returnee  who  had  made  a  false  claim  for
    conversion would be reasonably be likely to excite sufficient  interest
    to warrant further questioning.  His is an asylum claim that is  likely
    to have  depended  on  sur  place  activities,  including  baptism  and
    attending church, prima facie evidence of a crime  under  Iranian  law.
    The evidence overall indicates that  the  security  services  follow  a
    specified procedure when it comes to Christians: they are taken in  and
    required to sign the undertaking.  It does not seem likely to  us  that
    this procedure will be followed standing at an arrivals desk,  even  if
    the subject was protesting that it  was  all  false  and  that  he  was
    perfectly willing to sign.  A returnee is  not  someone  who  has  been
    picked up on an Iranian street.  He is someone who has just  come  back
    from the United Kingdom, possibly having spent a considerable amount of
    time here; the Iranian security services perceive there to be  a  clear
    link between Christianity and attempts by the  West  to  undermine  the
    Iranian state.  These factors cumulatively give rise, in our view, to a
    "particular concern" that such a transfer  to  second-line  questioning
    would be likely".

10. In PS it  was  recognised  that  this  would  potentially  be  a  short
    'disruptive detention' but when assessing the risk to an  appellant  of
    there being a longer detention increasing the  risk  of  ill-treatment,
    the risk assessment must be fact sensitive, looking to  the  particular
    characteristics and behaviours of the appellant.

11. I am in agreement that the judge's analysis of risk  to  the  appellant
    does not recognise at [37] to [43] that he would be detained and  taken
    for second-line questioning at the airport. It is said at [43]:

    "the appellant has not shown that returning him to  Iran  would  expose
    him to a real risk of  an  act  of  persecution  because  he  would  be
    returning as a failed asylum seeker.  SSH and HR (illegal exit:  failed
    asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) is  applied.   There  is
    nothing before me to indicate that the appellant could not be  returned
    to Iran on a laissez passer.  The  appellant  is  an  Iranian  male  in
    respect of whom no adverse interest has previously been  manifested  by
    the Iranian state.  He does not face a real risk of  persecution/breach
    of his Article 3 rights on return to Iran on  account  of  having  left
    Iran illegally and/or being a  failed  asylum  seeker.   No  such  risk
    exists at the time for questioning on return  to  Iran  nor  after  the
    facts (i.e. of illegal exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have been
    established.  In particular, there  is  no  real  risk  of  prosecution
    leading to imprisonment."

12. At [43] there was no acknowledgement that during  his  questioning  the
    appellant would be expected to admit that he had claimed asylum in  the
    United Kingdom and provide the basis of that  claim.   It  is  manifest
    from various authorities that the  appellant,  even  though  he  was  a
    failed asylum seeker and his claim to be a  genuine  Christian  convert
    had not been made out, could not be expected  to  lie  to  the  Iranian
    authorities and that he would therefore reveal that he had  claimed  to
    have been a Christian convert to the authorities in the United  Kingdom
    and that he had attended church and been baptised.

13. There is no assessment by the judge of what risk, if any, would  entail
    to the appellant during this detention. I am satisfied that  there  was
    an error of law in that the judge failed to make findings on a material
    issue and that this error, as conceded by the respondent,  renders  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal unsafe  and  was  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal because it was the task of the  judge  to  assess
    the risk to the appellant on return.

14. I therefore set aside that decision, preserving  the  factual  findings
    made by First-tier Tribunal Judge McManus which are not challenged.

15. It was agreed by both parties that the most appropriate way to  proceed
    with the appeal, given that the findings are not challenged,  would  be
    to re-make the decision in the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  the
    preserved findings of fact.

Remaking

Preserved facts

16. The preserved facts are as follows:

       a) The appellant  claimed  asylum  in  2011  on  the  basis  of  his
          conversion to Christianity.

       b) The appellant attended a catholic church on a  few  occasions  in
          2011.

       c) He made further submissions asserting that he was a Christian  in
          2013, 2016 and 2018.

       d) The appellant attended the Victory Christian Centre which  is  an
          Assemblies of God Church from June 2017 until December  2018  (up
          to the date of the appeal hearing at the First-tier Tribunal)  on
          a weekly basis and in addition attended bible classes.

       e) The appellant was baptised at the  Victory  Christian  Centre  in
          August 2017.

       f) The appellant is not a genuine Christian convert. His  attendance
          at church and baptism were not in good faith  but  undertaken  to
          substantiate his manufactured claim for asylum.

       g) The appellant has been absent from Iran for a period of 9 years.

       h) The appellant left Iran illegally.

       i) The appellant would not proselytise on return to Iran.

    Submissions

17. Mr Winter addressed me on  the  recent  country  guidance  case  of  PS
    (Christian - risk) Iran CG [2020] UKUT 00046.  He submits that  despite
    the fact that the  appellant  has  been  found  not  to  be  a  genuine
    Christian convert and that his asylum claim has  been  manufactured  in
    order to remain in the United Kingdom,  the appellant  nevertheless  is
    at real risk of serious harm in accordance with headnote 4(iv)(c) of PS
    because he has been attending a church  in  the  UK  with  a  perceived
    connection to Iranian house churches.

18. Headnote 4 states:

    "In cases where the claimant is found to be insincere  in  his  or  her
    claimed conversion, there is  not  a  real  risk  of  persecution  'in-
    country'. There being no reason for such  an  individual  to  associate
    himself with Christians, there is not a real risk that he would come to
    the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities. Decision-makers  must
    nevertheless consider the possible risks arising at the  'pinch  point'
    of arrival:

          i) All returning failed asylum seekers are subject to questioning
             on arrival and this will  include  questions  about  why  they
             claimed asylum;



         ii) A returnee who divulges that he claimed to be a  Christian  is
             reasonably likely to be transferred for further questioning;

        iii) The returnee can be expected to sign an undertaking renouncing
             his claimed Christianity. The questioning  will  therefore  in
             general be short and will not  entail  a  real  risk  of  ill-
             treatment;

         iv) If there are any reasons why the detention becomes  prolonged,
             the risk of ill- treatment will correspondingly rise.  Factors
             that could result in prolonged detention must be determined on
             a case by case basis. They could include but are  not  limited
             to:


                  c) Attendance at a church with a perceived  connection  to
                     Iranian house churches"

19. Mr Winter took me to the evidence in the bundle which demonstrates that
    Victory Christian Centre is an 'Assemblies of God Church UK'  including
    letters from the Reverend Charlotte Gillies and Reverend Alex  Gillies.
    Mr Winter also pointed to the fact that the judge had accepted  in  his
    decision at [14] that the Victory Christian Centre is an Assemblies  of
    God church.

20. Mr Winter then took me to evidence which  was  before  the  judge  that
    demonstrated that the Assemblies of God  Church  have  links  with  the
    house church movement in Iran.  He  pointed  to  evidence  produced  in
    earlier Country Guidance cases including FS and Others (Iran -Christian
    Converts) Iran CG [2004] UKAIT 00303 and SZ and  JM  (Christians  -  FS
    confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082.   Mr  Winter  acknowledged  that
    these authorities have been replaced by the recent country guidance  of
    PS but nevertheless submitted that this did not undermine the  evidence
    adduced in those country guidance cases. In particular evidence  in  SZ
    was provided by Ms Enayat, an expert witness on  Iran  who  produced  a
    lengthy report for the latest country guidance case of PS.   Mr  Winter
    submitted that Ms Enayat is said a highly qualified expert in her field
    and that she has for many years been  paying  close  attention  to  the
    situation of Christians in Iran. He also referred me to page 42 of  the
    Danish Immigration Services Report  dated  2018  which  emphasises  the
    level of scrutiny by the authorities of house  churches.  The  evidence
    mentions Assemblies of the Lord Churches in this context.

21. In summary, Mr Winter's submission is that the Assemblies of God Church
    is a particularly evangelical church whose activities are abhorrent  to
    the Iranian regime and that the Assemblies of God Church is linked with
    'house churches' movement in Iran.   This is an increased  risk  factor
    for the appellant in line with PS. The real question is  whether  there
    is a real  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return.  As  a  result  of  the
    appellant's association with the Victory Christian Centre, which is  an
    Assemblies of God church linked to the house movement in Iran, there is
    a real risk  that  the  appellant  would  be  subject  to  a  prolonged
    detention increasing the likelihood of him being submitted  to  serious
    harm.

22. Mr Clark then made his submissions.  He pointed to the  fact  that  the
    judge had made clear findings that this individual was  not  a  genuine
    Christian convert albeit he had attended church and had been  baptised.
    The period of his attendance in church was a short  period.  The  judge
    accepted that he had attended church between June 2017 and the  end  of
    2018.  His submission was that the facts of  this  appellant  are  very
    similar to those of the appellant in PS who was found not to be at risk
    of persecution.  PS had attended a church in Manchester, the  Coverdale
    Christian Church and had been baptised in May 2015.   In  summary  PS's
    situation is similar to that of this appellant.  He drew  my  attention
    to the fact that the appellant did not  meet  any  of  the  other  risk
    categories including previous adverse contact with the  Iranian  social
    security services, connection to persons of  interest  to  the  Iranian
    authorities or overt  social  media  content  indicating  that  he  had
    actively promoted Christianity. He emphasised there was  no  suggestion
    that any of these factors would lead to this  appellant  being  of  any
    particular interest.

23. In reference to PS headnote 4(iv)(c) he said that the evidence produced
    by Mr Winter is thin.  There was  little  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Assemblies of God Church in the United  Kingdom  has  connections  with
    house churches in Iran.  The evidence referred to by Mr Winter  in  the
    previous country guidance cases was dated back to 2004  and  2008.   Mr
    Clark's submission is that this appellant would be treated in the  same
    way as PS as found by the Upper Tribunal at [140] where it is stated,

         "Our conclusion in respect of disingenuous Christian  claimants  is
         set out under the heading risk on return.   While  we  accept  that
         such returnees will likely be subject  to  further  questioning  on
         arrival, we do not find that it will, in general, take very long or
         entail ill-treatment.  It is the widespread practice of the Iranian
         authorities to detain a suspected Christian for a short period  and
         require him to sign an undertaking which amongst other things  will
         require him to renounce Christianity  and  formally  accept  Islam.
         There being no reason of conscious for the disingenuous claimant to
         refuse to do so he will be released quickly.  He may be subject  to
         surveillance but will not absent  any  other  relevant  factors  be
         exposed to a real risk of persecution thereafter.  Where there  are
         aggravating factors such that a real risk of harm may arise at port
         will depend on the individual case."

24. The appellant will be subject to further  questioning  but  he  submits
    that the appellant has failed to demonstrate that this would entail any
    ill-treatment. He referred me to [150] and [151] of PS.

Conclusions

25. My starting point in this appeal is that the appellant is not a genuine
    Christian convert and this has been overwhelmingly found to be the case
    since 2011.  This appellant is somebody who been attending  church  and
    been baptised in order to bolster a fabricated claim for asylum.

26. Nevertheless, the issue before me is whether there is a  real  risk  of
    persecution to the appellant  on  his  return  to  Iran  regardless  of
    whether he is genuine convert or not.  I have considered very carefully
    the situation of this appellant.  On the face of it,  this  appellant's
    situation is similar to that of PS.  Like  PS  the  appellant  attended
    church in the United Kingdom and has been baptised.  He has been  found
    not to be a genuine Christian convert. Like PS, there  are  no  further
    risk factors in respect of him in that he has had no contact  with  the
    authorities prior to leaving Iran, no known connection with any persons
    of interest nor has he produced any overt social media content.

27. It is agreed that this appellant is a failed  asylum  seeker  who  left
    Iran  illegally  and  that  he  will  be  questioned  by  the   Iranian
    authorities at the "pinch point" of his arrival in Iran.   It  is  also
    accepted that like PS, he will not be expected to lie and it will  come
    to light that he claimed asylum on the basis that he has  converted  to
    Christianity and been baptised and will be transferred to  second  line
    questioning.  It is also agreed that this appellant like PS will inform
    the Iranian authorities that his  claim  to  a  Christian  convert  was
    fabricated and that he is prepared to sign the necessary undertaking.

28. However, on deeper inspection, I find that this  appellant's  situation
    is somewhat different to that of PS.  Firstly, this  appellant  claimed
    asylum in 2011, nine years ago. The basis of his initial claim at  that
    time was that he  was  a  Christian  convert  who  has  attended  house
    churches in Iran.  He then made further submissions  in  2016  claiming
    that he was at that time attending a  Catholic  church.   It  has  been
    accepted that in 2016 he did for  a  short  period  attend  a  Catholic
    church although he was not baptised at that point.  It is accepted that
    more latterly, for a period of approximately eighteen  months  that  he
    attended the Victory Christian Centre on a weekly  basis,  as  well  as
    attending additional Bible classes and that he had been  going  to  the
    church for approximately one month before he was baptised in July 2016.
     I find that these facts are likely to come to light during questioning
    by the Iranian authorities.  I find that in the case of this  appellant
    there is a much longer history of association with Christian  movements
    than is the case with PS.

29. I consider next whether the Victory Christian Centre is  an  Assemblies
    of God Church. I have had  regard  to  the  letter  from  the  Reverend
    Charlotte Gillies dated 23 November 2018 which reads:

    "I can confirm that Mr M R has been attending Victory Christian  Centre
    (an Assemblies of God UK Church) since 2017".

30. The Reverend Alexander Gillies who also wrote  a  letter  on  the  same
    date, also refers to the Victory Christian Centre being  an  Assemblies
    of God UK Church.

31. I also note and take into account  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McManus
    acknowledged that the Victory Christian Centre is an 'Assembly  of  God
    UK Church' at [14] of his determination and that this finding  has  not
    been challenged by the respondent.

32. I therefore find to the  lower  standard  that  the  Victory  Christian
    Centre which is the church that the  appellant  was  attending  for  18
    months is an 'Assemblies of God UK Church'.

33. I now turn to Mr Winter's  submissions  in  relation  to  the  evidence
    linking the Assemblies of God Churches to the house church movement  in
    Iran.  He pointed  to  evidence  at  [38]  of  FS  and  Others  (  Iran
    -Christian Converts)  Iran  CG  [2004]  UKAIT  00303  which  states  as
    follows;

    "It said that few churches in Iran proselytised;  the  most  active  in
    that respect were the two Assembly of God Churches  and  the  Episcopal
    Church of Iran, the Anglican Church."

34. He also pointed to evidence from  Miss  Enayat  which  was  before  the
    Tribunal in SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008]  UKAIT
    00082.

35. At [20] it is said:

    "Under a heading 'house churches  and  television  evangelism'  in  the
    report at paragraph 2.3.7, Miss Enayat dealt with  house  churches  and
    the related topic of television evangelism.  She said that Assembly  of
    God members have been meeting in house churches since the early  1990s,
    and on a limited scale so have Anglicans".

36. At [21] it continues:

    "She said the  programmes  are  varied.  Some  are  said  to  preach  a
    straightforward Iranianised version of the US Born Again  Christianity.
    Others, made by the Assembly of God and Presbyterian  Christians,  have
    an indigenous flavour and produce evangelical and educational  material
    which is culturally appealing to Iranians.  Sat Seven have  counsellors
    who can be telephoned from inside Iran.  These channels  claim  a  high
    success rate and a very large following".

37. Further at [29] of SZ it is said:

    "[Miss Enayat's] best estimate for the membership of  Assembly  of  God
    Churches was 1,500 to 2,500 now whereas, from two or three  sources  it
    seems that there were 2,000 to 3,000 in the early 2000s.  She said that
    her figures exclude the newer house  churches.   Her  Assembly  of  God
    figure included house churches that were a consequence of the  closures
    of the Assembly of God Churches probably  amounting  to  a  maximum  of
    1,000"

38. I take into consideration Mr Clark's submission that this  evidence  is
    somewhat old in that it was produced in  respect  of  Country  Guidance
    cases in 2004 and 2008.  Nevertheless, that evidence was  given  by  Ms
    Enayat who is also an expert witness in the current country guidance of
    PS. Ms Enayat's qualifications and experience are set out at [12] of PS
    where it is said.

    "Whilst it is not  accepted  every  conclusion  that  Miss  Enayat  has
    reached we have no  hesitation  in  accepting  that  she  is  a  highly
    qualified expert in her field".

39. Ms Enayat produced a substantial report for PS. The report  was  listed
    in the index to the decision and not all of the contents of the  report
    was replicated or summarised in the decision. At [43] it is said:

    "House churches have existed as a phenomenon in Iran  since  the  early
    2000s.  Landinfo  explain  that  these  small   private   congregations
    initially consisted of  ethnic  Iranians  who  had  been  converted  by
    friends or relatives, or by an evangelist message brought directly into
    their homes by satellite television or the internet. As the  protestant
    denominations such as the Assembly of  God  faced  church  closure  and
    restriction, their  members  were  forced  underground  to  join  those
    already worshipping in private homes. In her written report Mrs  Enayat
    gives a detailed survey of this process but for our  purposes  she  and
    Landinfo are in agreement that the  different  waves  of  converts  and
    different  denominations  of  Farsi-speaking  Christians  are  now  all
    compelled to worship in the same covert manner".

40. The 2018 Danish fact-finding report at page 42 is  more  authority  for
    the proposition that there continues to be  a  connection  between  the
    Assemblies of God churches with house churches in Iran.   I  note  that
    their reference is to 'Assemblies of the Lord' churches but I accept Mr
    Winter's submission  that  in  reality  this  is  a  reference  to  the
    Assemblies of God churches.

41. I am satisfied from  all  of  the  evidence  before  me  including  the
    evidence in FS, SZ and PS that Assemblies of God church is not only  an
    evangelising church which broadcasts material to Iran from abroad,  but
    that it is also has a long-standing association with the  house  church
    movement in Iran. I am also satisfied that the Iranian authorities  are
    aware of this through the high level of surveillance  that  is  carried
    out and that this is why the congregations of these churches have  been
    forced underground.  I am satisfied that this  evidence  is  more  than
    tenuous.

42. I also find that the church which the appellant attended,  the  Victory
    Christian Centre, is an Assemblies of God Church because this is stated
    explicitly by the Reverends of that church and it is also  accepted  by
    the judge at [14] of his decision.

43. I find that in these circumstances the  situation  for  this  appellant
    diverges significantly from that of PS.

44. At [151] in PS it is explicitly stated:

    "PS has  no  other  enhanced  risk  factor  because  he  has  no  known
    connection with any  organisation  which  could  be  connected  by  the
    Iranian government to the house church movement".

45. From the evidence before me, I have found that Victory Christian Centre
    is an Assemblies of God church which is an  evangelising  church  which
    has connections with the Iranian house church movement and that  it  is
    accepted that by the date of the appeal  hearing,  the   appellant  had
    been attending this church for a period of eighteen months on a  weekly
    basis.  I do not agree with Mr  Clark  that  this  is  a  'trivial'  or
    'short' period.  It is also accepted that he has been baptised by  that
    same evangelising church.

46. I find, that although the appellant will inform the Iranian authorities
    that his claim was for asylum was fabricated and that he will  have  no
    hesitation in signing a renunciation of  his  Christian  religion,  the
    appellant will be expected to provide information about what  religious
    activities he undertook which will involve him telling the  authorities
    that he attended an Assemblies of God church for 18 months on a  weekly
    basis.

47. I note and take into account that PS  stresses  the  current  level  of
    paranoia with respect to evangelising Christian  churches  from  abroad
    who are seen by the  authorities  in  Iran  as  being  associated  with
    western and Zionist interests. Organised Christian activity and contact
    with Christian organisation abroad is seen  as  a  threat  against  the
    country's Islamic identity and national security. It is accepted in  PS
    that there has been a worsening political  climate  for  Christians  in
    Iran  and  that  the  Iranian  government  is  currently   particularly
    sensitive to the house church movement viewing members of this movement
    to be enemies of the Iranian state. There is considerable  surveillance
    of these churches and even ordinary members  are  at  risk  of  serious
    harm.

48. I find that the Iranian authorities will be aware of the links  between
    the Assemblies of God churches and house churches because this is long-
    standing and well-known.

49. At 116 of PS it is said

    "We accept the Secretary of State's general  rule  of  thumb  that  the
    longer this detention the greater risk  of  torture.   Decision  makers
    must therefore assess whether there are any reasons  why  interrogation
    would be prolonged.  We do not propose to offer an exhaustive  list  of
    the kind of facts that might be relevant here since the  evidence  does
    not permit us to do so.  We would however  note  that  one  aggravating
    fact identified in the sources is very outspoken social media activity.
     This would have to project the personal commitment of  the  individual
    rather than for instance simply liking post by  others.   Past  adverse
    interest by the Iranian authorities would also increase  risk  as  also
    would connections to other individuals with a profile.  We  have  found
    that the primary focus of the Iranian state is the perceived threat  of
    organised  religion  and  for  that  reason  we  are   satisfied   that
    association in the United Kingdom with a church  with  known  links  to
    Iranian house churches would certainly be a risk factor".

50. I find that the appellant falls within the PS headnote 4(iv)(c).  I  am
    satisfied that because  of  the  appellant's  individual  circumstances
    including the length of time he has been in the UK,  the fact  that  he
    has, from the outset of his arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2011
    claimed to be a Christian, the fact that he attended an  Assemblies  of
    God Church which has a specific profile of  evangelism  and  conversion
    from abroad and which is associated with  the  house  church  movement,
    regularly for a significant period  of  18  months  as  well  as  being
    baptised that church that  there  is  a  real  risk  that  should  this
    appellant be returned to Iran that he will despite revealing  that  his
    claim for asylum was fabricated  and offer  to  sign  the  renunciation
    that his circumstances will arise the suspicion of the authorities  and
    that he will be subject to a prolonged detention  and  questioning.  In
    these circumstances I find that there is a real risk that  he  will  be
    subject to ill-treatment and serious harm.

Notice of Decision

51.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and is set aside.
52.  The appeal is remade and allowed on asylum and Article 3 ECHR  grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to a contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            R J Owens                      Date     15 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

