
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12949/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                              |On 10 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     AU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Begum (SB Solicitors Limited)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 12 October  1987.   In
    the appellant's immigration  history  the  respondent  notes  that  the
    appellant was granted a visa to the United Kingdom on 17 September 2009
    as a Tier 4 Student.  He claimed to have arrived in this country  on  6
    October 2009 by plane and claimed asylum on 4 May 2018.   He  had  left
    Bangladesh and travelled to the UK on 17 September 2009 by plane.   The
    appellant claimed to be a member of Jamati Aslami.

2.   The appellant claimed he had a problem  with  his  cousin  following  a
    land dispute.  The respondent rejected the appellant's asylum claim  on
    31 October 2018.  The appellant's appeal came before a First-tier Judge
    on 10 December 2018.  In summarising the appellant's  claim  the  judge
    states as follows in paragraph 11 of his decision

         "11. The appellant did not have a good relationship with his cousin
             and uncle because they supported opposing  political  parties.
             The appellant's cousin is a member of the Awami League and the
             appellant is a member of JI. The appellant's  cousin  came  to
             this country in 2011 and he was deported in  2016  because  he
             had overstayed.  The  appellant's  cousin  believes  that  the
             appellant provided information about  him  to  the  respondent
             which resulted in him being  deported.  The  appellant  claims
             however that he did not have any  issues  with  the  appellant
             whilst he was in this country. The appellant's cousin returned
             to this country and claims that he will kill  the  appellant."



    The judge also heard evidence from the appellant's sister and her  son.



3.   The judge in finding against the appellant noted the  delay  in  making
    his claim for asylum.  He had come to the UK as a  student.   His  visa
    had expired in 2010 and he had not made his asylum claim until 2018.

4.   The judge went  on  to  reject  the  appellant's  protection  claim  as
    follows:

         "26. I am of also of the view that the claim by the appellant  that
             his sister on  her  recent  visit  to  Bangladesh  found  that
             threats are being issued against the appellant by  his  cousin
             because his cousin is of the view that the appellant  was  the
             cause of him being deported from this country.  It  transpires
             that the appellant's cousin has managed to find his  way  back
             into this country after being deported I do not find  this  to
             be credible and that this  narrative  has  been  developed  to
             assist the appellant in asylum claim.


         27.  The appellant claims that he has  decided  not  to  travel  to
             Bangladesh after being persuaded by his sister and parents not
             to travel because of the threats that had been received as not
             credible for  the  following  reasons.  I  did  not  find  the
             appellant  to  be  credible  regarding  how  he  obtained  the
             finances to purchase the tickets despite that fact that he  is
             not entitled to work  in  this  country.  I  do  not  find  it
             credible that the appellant decided that he  would  no  longer
             travel because of threats that  had  been  received  from  his
             cousin. I also note that the appellant claims that he  decided
             not to travel because his sister was going through a difficult
             time in her marriage and  that  her  son  and  his  nephew  is
             involved in drugs. I do not find  this  credible  because  the
             evidence is that the appellant's sister remarried in 2014  and
             is no longer in an abusive relationship.


         28.  I also  do  not  find  it  credible  that  the  appellant  has
             attempted on numerous occasions to comply with the immigration
             laws  but  that  he  has  been  prevented  to  do  so  by  the
             respondent. The fact is that the appellant has been in  breach
             of the Rules for a significant period  of  his  time  in  this
             country and the blame can only be attached to himself and  not
             the respondent. The appellant came here as a  student  and  he
             has not studied or been enrolled on a course since 2010.


         29.  I am of the view that the appellant has not provided  evidence
             that his cousin has power and influence in the Awami League so
             as to ensure that the appellant would  be  persecuted  on  his
             return to Bangladesh. I do  not  find  it  credible  that  the
             appellant does have a cousin who is  seeking  revenge  against
             him and this is one of the  core  planks  of  his  claim.  The
             appellant in my view because he has not provided  evidence  to
             show a fear of persecution would receive protection  from  the
             state.


         30.  I do not find it credible that the appellant and cousin have a
             land dispute and the appellant based on the fact that  he  has
             been in this country since 2009 when the  dispute  would  have
             existed did not take the opportunity to raise this issue  with
             the authorities in this country. I have no evidence before  me
             to suggest that the appellant whilst he was in Bangladesh  was
             pursuing the land issues or that there was  indeed  a  dispute
             ongoing between the families. The appellant is an educated man
             and he has not been dependent on the land for the  past  20/25
             years and hence my doubts in relation to  a  land  dispute  or
             that a cousin has issues with him.


         31.  I am also of the view that the appellant has sought to provide
             evidence that he is linked with the IJ in order to bolster his
             claim for asylum. The appellant did  not  provide  his  member
             card or receipt of membership which he  claims  is  lost.  The
             appellant claims that he attended meetings in  Bangladesh  but
             he could not describe how many demonstrations he attended. The
             appellant could also not identify/describe the colours of  the
             leaflets which one would have expected  him  to  because  this
             according to him was the main vehicle for the getting  out  of
             their information. The appellant claims that he  has  attended
             meetings of IJ in this country and that he  has  formal  links
             with the party. I  do  not  find  this  credible  because  the
             appellant this  evidence  has  been  brought  forward  by  the
             appellant in order to coincide with his asylum claim and it is
             not  in  my  view  plausible.  I  have  also  considered   the
             photographs which the appellant has  provided  and  I  do  not
             accept that the alleged injuries to the appellant were  caused
             by the actions of the appellant's cousin.


         32.  I also did not find the appellant's membership of  of  IJ  and
             political activities to  be  credible  because  he  could  not
             recall all of the details of the party and in  any  event  the
             information that he did recall are readily  available  on  the
             internet."

5.   The judge considered there would be  no  "very  significant  obstacles"
    preventing the appellant's return to Bangladesh where  members  of  his
    family resided and there were no exceptional circumstances  taking  the
    matter outside the Rules given his lengthy period of overstaying.   The
    relationship between the appellant and his  sister  was  not  over  and
    above the normal relationship one would expect between  siblings.   The
    judge referred to Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

6.   The judge did  not  consider  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    nephew to be exceptional although  he  accepted  that  the  nephew  was
    having a difficult time and that the appellant had been a  support  but
    he did not accept that the appellant was his only support.  He had  his
    mother and there was no credible evidence to suggest  that  his  father
    did not offer his support.

7.   The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

8.   There was an application for permission to appeal  and  permission  was
    granted on 19 March 2019 by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  had  been
    argued in the grounds that the judge had erred as there was no evidence
    that the appellant's cousin had returned to the UK and  threatened  the
    appellant.  It  was  also  argued  that  the  judge  had  not  properly
    considered the issue of sufficiency of  protection  in  Bangladesh  and
    that the date of the appellant's entry to the UK  was  incorrect.   The
    First-tier Judge found it arguable that if the evidence relating to the
    appellant's cousin had been wrongly recorded and findings made on  that
    basis then a fundamental  aspect  of  the  appellant's  case  might  be
    materially flawed.  All the grounds were arguable.

9.   Ms Begum submitted that the judge had materially erred  in  considering
    the appellant's credibility for the reasons given  in  the  grounds  on
    which permission had been granted.  She also sought to rely on  written
    submissions that had been served and received on 15  April  2019.   The
    judge had rejected the claim that the appellant had a  cousin  who  was
    seeking revenge against him and this was "one of the core planks of his
    claim".  The judge's misrecording of the  evidence  was  accordingly  a
    material mistake.  An additional argument was sought to be advanced  in
    relation to WhatsApp messages in the appellant's bundle and  there  was
    an application to introduce new evidence concerning the issue of delay.



10.  The judge had also erred in finding that there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for the appellant as the judge had failed to follow  country
    information.  Reference is also made to unreported case law.  The judge
    had failed to consider the evidence provided for the delay in  applying
    for asylum.

11.  Mr Kandola submitted that the fresh arguments  were  not  reflected  in
    the original grounds and there had been no application  made  to  amend
    the grounds on which permission had been granted.  He accepted that the
    point in relation to the cousin's return to the United Kingdom did  not
    appear to  be  supported  in  the  documentary  material.   However  he
    submitted it was not a material mistake  given  the  judge's  wholesale
    rejection of the appellant's credibility.

12.  The judge had referred to the lengthy delay prior to the  asylum  claim
    being made in paragraphs 25 and 28 of the determination. He  had  given
    adequate reasons  for  concluding  as  he  did  in  the  light  of  the
    appellant's immigration history.  The judge had been entitled  to  find
    that there was no evidence that the appellant's cousin  had  the  power
    and influence claimed in paragraph 29 of the decision.  Further he  had
    rejected the claim that there was a land dispute or indeed any  ongoing
    dispute.  The  judge  had  comprehensively  dismissed  the  appellant's
    account, including his claim that  he  was  linked  with  IJ.   He  had
    considered the photographic material.  If there had been  an  error  of
    fact it did not render his credibility findings as a whole unsafe.   It
    was submitted that the original grounds made no mention  of  the  point
    now relied upon in the written submissions concerning specific  threats
    referred to in WhatsApp messages.  In  respect  of  the  second  ground
    concerning sufficiency of protection, this was based on a misreading of
    what the judge had found in paragraph 29.  The judge had  not  accepted
    the appellant's  account  but  had  rejected  it  wholesale.   In  that
    circumstance there was no need to apply country guidance and the  judge
    was not obliged to take into account unreported determinations  in  the
    light of the Practice Direction.  Such cases were not  binding  in  any
    event.  In relation to points based on First Information Reports in the
    appellant's bundle which the judge had failed to properly scrutinise or
    mention, there was no duty on the Secretary of State to verify  foreign
    documents.  In reply it  was  submitted  that  the  grounds  were  very
    similar to the original grounds and simply an elaboration.   The  point
    about the judge's error in relation to the cousin's return  was  simply
    being elaborated.  The additional material should  be  submitted  under
    Rule 15(2A).

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I remind myself  that
    the appellant needs to establish an error of law before I can interfere
    with the judge's decision.

14.  The main point in this case centres around the  issue  of  the  judge's
    reference to the appellant's cousin returning to the UK  in  paragraphs
    11 and 26 of the decision.

15.  It is common ground that this appears to be a mistake of  fact  but  Mr
    Kandola submits that it is not a material error in the circumstances of
    this case.  As he points out the judge  has  rejected  the  appellant's
    claim in all material particulars.  He refers to the lengthy  delay  in
    the appellant claiming asylum.

16.  The issue of the lengthy delay was not the subject of challenge in  the
    grounds upon which permission to appeal was  granted.   Permission  was
    sought at the hearing to raise arguments  in  respect  of  the  judge's
    findings  in  relation  to  the  delay.   As  Mr  Kandola  submits   no
    application had been made to lodge amended grounds and I see  no  basis
    for admitting the new grounds or the the further material. In  relation
    to unreported determinations, as  he  points  out,  their  citation  is
    governed by Practice Direction 11.

17.  The judge  having  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  in  all  material
    particulars did not err in finding that there was no credible  evidence
    that he would be at risk on return and the question of  sufficiency  of
    protection did not arise. As was submitted at the First-tier hearing by
    the appellant's representative  (paragraph  24  of  the  decision)  the
    appeal turned on the issue of credibility.  The judge did consider  the
    photographic evidence lodged in support of  the  appellant's  claim  in
    paragraph 31 of the determination.

18.  I am not satisfied that the grounds upon  which  permission  to  appeal
    was granted raise a material error of law.

Decision

Appeal dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Judge shall stand.

It is appropriate to make an anonymity order in this case.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 3 May 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal H
