
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/12915/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 June 2017                          |  On 5 July 2017                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OOA
                         (anonymity directiON MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Masood, Aden & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department against a determination promulgated on 13 February  2017  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver.  The appellant (as I shall  style
    him since this was his status  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  is  from
    Somalia, born on 2 January 1997, who some four years after arriving  in
    the United Kingdom claimed leave to remain.

2.   The judge allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted on a number of linked
    grounds but those relied  upon  this  morning  by  Mr  Deller  for  the
    Secretary of State have  focused  on  the  inadequacy  of  the  judge's
    consideration of MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  (CG)  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 and additionally a ground relating to the judge's failure to
    give proper  consideration  to  the  proportionality  assessment  under
    Article 8.

3.   Mr Masood, who acts for the appellant, candidly accepts that there  may
    be shortcomings within  the  determination  but  contends  that  it  is
    sufficient for the Upper Tribunal to be satisfied that MOJ was properly
    applied and that the Article 8 determination was a proper  exercise  of
    judicial discretion.

4.   Mr Masood has taken me to the head note of  MOJ  and  has  additionally
    made reference to RG  (Automatic  deport  Section  33(2)(a)  exception)
    Nepal [2010] UKUT 273 (IAC). In addition he has relied upon passages in
    the Court of Appeal  judgment  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v HK (Turkey) [2010] EWCA Civ 583.

5.   Mr Masood is undoubtedly right in that the determination  is  unusually
    brief and could usefully have been  expanded.  The  judge's  particular
    findings are at paragraph 24 which reads as follows:

         "Since I have found that the appellant left Somalia at the age of 2
         it follows that the only Somali culture which  he  has  experienced
         has been that reflected within his family.  This is only a part  of
         what a normal child would receive and I  find  that  on  return  he
         would be a fish out of water.  He would have no  clan  support  and
         would simply not know his way  around.   His  is  a  situation  not
         envisaged in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  (CG)  [2014]
         UKUT 00442.  The security situation has  not  improved  since  that
         case was decided and the circumstances of the  appellant  were  not
         catered for.  In MOJ it was held that


             'relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with
             no former links to the city, no access to funds and  no  other
             form of clan, family or  social  support  is  unlikely  to  be
             realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home  and
             some form of ongoing financial support there will  be  a  real
             risk of  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
             accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
             possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
             below acceptable humanitarian standards'.


         I find that the appellant falls into this category.


         This appeal is at least as concerned with family life as it is with
         asylum.  It is a classic case where the bright-line of the  age  of
         majority in respect of family life has no meaning, Kugathas v  SSHD
         [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31.   After  the  experiences  of  the  family's
         upheavals it must have been galling indeed  for  the  appellant  to
         realise the drastic consequences of his father's delay in  applying
         for him and his brother.  It must have been even  more  galling  to
         consider the prospect that he might return where  his  brother  had
         succeeded in remedying the situation.  Proceeding forthwith to  the
         proportionality of his removal,  I  find  that  his  removal  would
         breach Article 8 jurisprudence which had the application been  made
         some months before would have recognised the limits of  the  public
         interest in the maintenance of fair but firm immigration in respect
         of this particular family."

6.   Mr Masood has made  particular  reference  to  paragraph  (ix)  of  the
    headnote in MOJ, which gives a series of bullet points that  the  judge
    should take into account in circumstances where an individual is facing
    return to Mogadishu after a period of absence with no nuclear family or
    close relatives.  The list is non-exhaustive.

7.   However, whilst Mr Masood was seeking to  make  powerful  and  detailed
    representations based on material which  might  have  been  before  the
    judge, regrettably none (or at least an insufficient  amount)  of  that
    material is discussed in the determination.  I have quoted the relevant
    section verbatim. There is no more.

8.   In my assessment, the determination is wholly inadequate to  deal  with
    (1) the evaluation and assessment required under  MOJ  (2)  the  proper
    application of country guidance and, in consequence, (3) the Article  8
    assessment, which is cursory in the extreme.  The  judge's  failure  to
    deal properly with MOJ has inevitably  infected  his  assessment  under
    Article 8.  This is a  significant  error  of  law  and  one  which  is
    certainly material.  It is not open to the Upper Tribunal  to  seek  to
    rectify ex post facto various deficiencies in the determination  as  Mr
    Masood invites me to do.

9.   Both Mr Deller and Mr Masood are of the opinion,  in  which  I  concur,
    that this matter needs to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Where they disagree is that Mr Deller submits it needs to be dealt with
    entirely afresh by a different judge conducting full factual assessment
    and making relevant findings of fact.  Mr Masood submits  that  certain
    findings of fact can  be  preserved  and  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to Judge Oliver, who has heard evidence and  made  credibility
    findings.

10.  With respect, that submission is unsustainable.  The errors of law  are
    such that the entire decision is undermined  and  it  would  wrong  for
    Judge Oliver  to  determine  it  a  second  time.   It  would  also  be
    inappropriate for any findings or views on credibility to be preserved.
     The determination is inadequate: proper consideration was not given to
    the country guidance or the Article 8 considerations.

11.  I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remit  the
    matter to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Oliver. I make no
    order with the regard to preserving any facts.   If  the  Secretary  of
    State wishes to make any concession as to the appellant's age  when  he
    left Somalia, she is at liberty to do so, but  as  matters  stand  this
    will be one of the issued to be examined when the matter is  determined
    afresh.

Notice of Decision

   1) Having found an error of las the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      is set aside;
   2) The matter is remitted to be determined afresh by a judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal other than Judge Oliver;
   3) No part of the determination is preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         4 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC




