
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12937/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   ms M K
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L Bashaw (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malik, promulgated on 7th January 2019, following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 10th December 2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran, was born on 29th August  1983,  and
    is a female.  She appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent,
    refusing her claim for asylum and for humanitarian protection  pursuant
    to paragraph 339C of HC 395 in a decision dated 27th October 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim  is  that  she  was  born  a  Shia
    Muslim, experienced financial difficulties with her husband, was forced
    to live  with  her  husband's  parents,  and  then  was  introduced  to
    Christianity after she had attended a  hair  salon  and  met  with  her
    friend.  She thereafter attended the house church in  Iran  six  times.
    Eventually, she left Iran illegally.  In the UK, she  alleged  to  have
    become a believer on 20th May 2018, the day of the Pentecost, which was
    the first day she attended the [Church].  She now fears that if she  is
    returned to Iran she would be persecuted for apostasy.

The Judge's Findings

 4. In a careful and comprehensive determination, the judge disbelieved the
    Appellant's account.  She disbelieved the Appellant's  claim  that  she
    had been mistreated by her husband, which she found to have been wholly
    manufactured as a background to her claim.  The judge also  disbelieved
    the Appellant's conversion to Christianity.  On  the  other  hand,  the
    judge did find the two Christian witnesses, the Reverend Dunne and  Mrs
    Butler, to be credible and sincere in their belief that  the  Appellant
    was a genuine Christian.  The judge, however, came  to  the  conclusion
    that the Appellant  was  a  person  who  had  not  generally  converted
    (paragraph 49).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  law  because
    she imposed her own standard of the "reasonable Christian" on  why  the
    Appellant should choose to be baptised before becoming fully conversant
    with the Old Testament.   The  level  of  knowledge  held  of  the  Old
    Testament's similarity to Islamic teachings, was also a matter that the
    judge had wrongly gone into.  Moreover, the judge had  failed  to  heed
    the principles recently established in the Scottish case of  TF  [2018]
    CSIH 58.

 7. On 28th January 2019 permission to appeal was granted.

 8. On 6th February 2019, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.  It was then that the Appellant's  claimed  account
    of events in Iran (referred to at paragraphs 39 to 46, and at paragraph
    48 of the determination) that  her  husband  was  oppressive  had  been
    properly  rejected  by  the  judge.   These  findings  were  not   even
    challenged in the grounds.  This is material which is relevant.

 9. Nevertheless, the judge had not allowed her findings in this respect to
    infect the consideration of the claim that the Appellant was a convert.
     The judge had stated (at paragraph 49) that, "notwithstanding my above
    credibility findings, it is the Appellant's claim now  that  she  is  a
    Christian convert  and  attends  church"  which  the  judge  separately
    focused upon.

10. The judge then identified the inconsistencies between the  evidence  of
    the Reverend Dunne and the Appellant,  and  set  out  the  reasons  for
    rejecting her claimed conversion.  It was also noted that  the  witness
    [S]  Butler,  believed  the  Appellant's  account  of  events  in  Iran
    [paragraph 34].  The judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the  Appellant's
    account having accorded appropriate  weight  to  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses.  The authority of TF was not binding upon  the  Tribunal  in
    this country.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me, Miss  Bashaw,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, focused upon the  eventual  conclusions  of  the  judge  (at
    paragraph 49), where she had said that she was satisfied that  Reverend
    Dunne and Mrs Butler were "credible and sincere in  their  belief  that
    the Appellant is a genuine Christian".  However, in the same breath the
    judge had gone on to say that, "but given their  faith  and  conviction
    they would be predisposed to accept that she has converted"  (paragraph
    49).  That suggestion, submitted Miss Bashaw, that the judge had  given
    less than proper weight to the belief of the two church witnesses.   In
    fact, it suggested that the judge was impugning an  intrinsic  lack  of
    credibility  in  their  evidence,  precisely  because  "they  would  be
    predisposed" to the Appellant.

12. Second, Miss Bashaw submitted that the case of TF [2018] CSIH 58  makes
    it abundantly clear (at paragraphs 48 to 49)

         "That the fact that the evidence of the  witness  is  found  to  be
         generally incredible and not relied upon, does not  somehow  become
         evidence to the opposite effect, to be used against  the  Appellant
         in contradiction of other independent evidence on which he relies".



13. Third, both witnesses, confirmed independently that they  observed  the
    Appellant in her Christian activities both at church and at home.   Mrs
    Butler's evidence was particularly compelling in that,  she  drew  upon
    her experiences of working as  a  social  worker.   She  said  she  had
    observed the Appellant closely (including her body  language)  and  had
    even made a surprise visit to the Appellant and found her  reading  the
    Bible.  They had played together.   She  had  been  observed  during  a
    twelve week alpha course.  This  evidence  of  the  witnesses  was  not
    evaluated (at paragraph 49) and the judge simply rejected  the  witness
    evidence as being "predisposed".

14.  Finally,  the  judge  erred  in  law  because  she  "peered  into  the
    Appellant's soul" and imposed on the Appellant an additional burden  of
    passing a "reasonable Christian" test, which was  wrong  in  law.   The
    judge  imposed  a  wrong  subjective  standard  of  how  a  "reasonable
    Christian" would behave, which was inconsistent with  the  evidence  of
    Christian witnesses.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

16. First, this is a case where the judge makes findings of fact that  were
    open to her.  She records how the Appellant attended  six  times  at  a
    house church in Iran.  Nevertheless, she claimed to become  a  believer
    on 20th May 2018, the first day that she attended the [Church], and the
    judge's conclusion that, "I do not find it reasonably likely she  would
    have become so on the very first day she attended a church in the  UK",
    was open to her.

17. Second, the judge backs this up with a statement that it was not  clear
    "why the letter from the [Church] does not confirm this".

18. Third, whilst the Appellant claimed that the [Church] was different  to
    the house church, "there is no reasonable explanation then  as  to  why
    she waited until the first day she attended  a  church  in  the  UK  to
    consider herself a Christian", given that she had already attended  six
    times in Iran.

19. Finally, she  had  actually  described  herself  as  a  Muslim  in  her
    screening interview (see paragraph 47).

20. In addition to all this, I have looked at the judge's treatment of  the
    church witnesses carefully.  I do not find  the  judge  as  having  not
    given the church witnesses their due in the manner that  is  complained
    of.  What the judge states is that,

         "On the evidence before me I am satisfied she does  attend  church.
         I found Reverend Dunne and Mrs Butler to be credible and sincere in
         their belief that the Appellant is a genuine Christian - but  given
         their faith and conviction they would be predisposed to accept  she
         has converted - but neither they, nor I, can look inside her  soul"
         (paragraph 49).

21. In this respect, of course, it is necessary to  look  at  the  Scottish
    case of TF and MA [2018] CSIH 58 where the court looked at the evidence
    as falling into three specific categories,  as  it  explained,  at  the
    basic level, it consists of factual evidence about what the  Appellants
    themselves did and said in relation to their attendance at the  church.
    At the second level, it consists of evidence explaining  the  practices
    of the church itself.  At the third level, it consists  of  an  opinion
    and is given by the individuals in positions of  responsibility  within
    the church, who have observed the Appellants in their activities at the
    church (see paragraph 52).

22. In this respect, it is worth noting that, having said that both  church
    witnesses were "credible and sincere", the judge then went on  to  look
    at their opinions and found that, Reverend Dunne had said he had spoken
    to the Appellant about the Bible on a  number  of  occasions,  but  the
    Appellant said that she had not done so.  Therefore, the judge was  not
    simply "predisposed", but was looking at the evidence before her on the
    day of the hearing.

23. In  fact,  the  judge  gave  further  additional  cogent  reasons  when
    observing that,

         "The  letter  from  the  [Church]  is  based  on  the   Appellant's
         attendance there of seventeen days; the assessment made in Reverend
         Dunne's first letter of 1st October 2018  was  some  sixteen  weeks
         after she first attended; there does not  appear  to  be  a  formal
         process to make such an assessment - nor an explanation as  to  why
         the Appellant would be so eager to be baptised before  being  fully
         conversant with all aspects  of  Christianity,  including  the  Old
         Testament" (paragraph 49).

24. In this respect, the Scottish Court of Session case of TF and MA is  of
    assistance because it observes that, "in cases where the court does not
    have sufficient knowledge of  its  own"  the  evidence  from  within  a
    particular church or of a particular tradition "can help 'to illuminate
    the court's  understanding  of  matters  [which  may  be]  outwith  its
    knowledge'" (at paragraph 54).  Therefore,  the  judge  was  here  well
    within the confines of what was set out as a paradigm in the case of TF
    and MA [2018] CSIH 58, in coming to her conclusions.

25. Accordingly, notwithstanding Miss Bashaw's valiant efforts before me to
    persuade me otherwise, I am not persuaded that the  decision  of  Judge
    Malik below amounted to an error of law.

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

27. An anonymity direction is made.

28. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019

