
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12684/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 August 2020 by Skype                      |                              |
|                                                |On 18 August 2020             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                OLEKSANDR [A]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain instructed by Bankfield Heath Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. On 20  February  2020  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Hanlon  ('the
        Judge') dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal has been granted by another judge of the First-
        tier Tribunal, the  operative  part  of  the  grant  being  in  the
        following terms:


        "The grounds are arguable by a narrow margin.  At  [48]  while  the
        Judge limited the weight to be given to  the  appellant's  mother's
        letter, significantly the Judge did not reject that evidence.  This
        visit by the Ukrainian authorities would seem to  substantiate  the
        experts report at [46] and [48] of his report, that  the  appellant
        was likely to be on a shared database and that the Ukrainians would
        hand him over to Russia.



Background


     3. The appellant was born on 28  April  1993  and  is  a  national  of
        Ukraine.  The basis of his claim for  international  protection  is
        that he fears persecution if returned to Ukraine as a result of his
        deportation from Ukraine  to  Russia  because  he  is  a  Jehovah's
        Witness  who  had  resided  in  Russia  since  2012  and  who   has
        residential status there.
     4. The Judge considered the documentary evidence and had  the  benefit
        of seeing and hearing oral evidence being given. Findings  of  fact
        are set out from [35] of the decision under challenge which can  be
        summarised in the following terms:

           i. The appellant's identity, date  of  birth,  nationality,  and
              conversion to the Jehovah's Witness  faith  is  not  disputed
              [40].
          ii. The Judge finds both the appellant and  his  wife's  evidence
              consistent in relation to whether the appellant continued  to
              practice as a Jehovah's Witness [41].
         iii. The appellant is to be returned to Ukraine [42].
          iv. The Judge noted the appellant's claim  of  a  fear  of  being
              returned to Ukraine  and  then  being  extradited  to  Russia
              because he is a Jehovah's Witness who had previously come  to
              the attention of the authorities and in light of the fact the
              Russian Supreme Court had upheld a ban on  Jehovah's  Witness
              activities in April meaning he  will  face  a  real  risk  of
              persecution. The appellant did not  fear  being  a  Jehovah's
              Witness in Ukraine but fears being extradited to Russia [42].
           v. The Judge finds there was no evidence  the  appellant  had  a
              well-founded fear of persecution [42].
          vi.  The  Judge  accepted  as  credible  the  appellant's  wife's
              evidence  that  they  had  been  arrested  by   the   Russian
              authorities and detained as claimed for a period  of  5  days
              from 23 March  2019  as  a  result  of  their  activities  as
              Jehovah's Witnesses. The Judge finds that the  appellant  and
              his wife  had  previously  been  persecuted  by  the  Russian
              authorities as a result of their religious beliefs  and  that
              intolerance of  the  appellant's  religious  beliefs  by  the
              authorities  has  been  enshrined  by  the   prohibition   of
              Jehovah's Witnesses in  Russia,  leading  to  a  finding  the
              appellant and his wife would be at risk of persecution in the
              event that they were returned to Russia [43].
         vii. The Judge refers  to  the  expert  report  from  'Dr  TH'  in
              relation to the question of whether  the  appellant  will  be
              handed  over  to  the  Russian   authorities   by   Ukrainian
              authorities [45]
        viii. The Judge finds that if the appellant and his  wife  were  of
              such importance to the Russian authorities  that  they  would
              seek the extradition of  the  appellant  and  his  wife  from
              Ukraine  in  the  event  they  were  returned   to   Ukraine,
              "somewhat begs the question" as to why the appellant and  his
              wife were released by the authorities in Russia when they had
              them in their custody. The Judge accepting that after 5  days
              detention the appellant and his wife  were  released  by  the
              authorities due to the intervention of a solicitor [45].
          ix. The Judge finds there was nothing in an article  relied  upon
              by the appellant's representative suggests  that  Russia  has
              sought the extradition of members  the  prohibited  religions
              from Ukraine or other countries [46].
           x. The Judge did not find  the  Human  Rights  Council  document
              relied upon by the appellant's representative and  handed  in
              at  the  hearing  suggested  that  extradition  of  Jehovah's
              Witnesses has previously occurred [47].
          xi. The Judge confirms that he has taken into account an  undated
              letter from the appellant's mother referring to a visit on 25
              June 2019,  the  day  on  which  the  appellant  should  have
              attended upon the authorities in Russia in accordance with  a
              summons of 25 June 2019 issued by the Prosecutor's Office  in
              Ukraine who are  looking  for  her  son  in  which  there  is
              reference to  the  Prosecutor's  office  attending  again  in
              October 2019 which is said  to  be  evidence  in  the  letter
              suggesting that Ukraine authorities had been requested by the
              Russian authorities to look  for  the  appellant.  The  Judge
              finds that the letter could only have limited weight attached
              to it although does find the reference to an attendance on 25
              June 2019 is consistent with a copy of the summons returnable
              for that date as considered. The  Judge  however  finds  that
              even if the Ukrainian authorities had been requested  by  the
              Russian authorities to ascertain the appellant's  whereabouts
              this was some distance  away  from  the  Russian  authorities
              actively seeking the appellant's  extradition  in  the  event
              that he had been located in Ukraine [48].
         xii. The Judge was not satisfied the required standard that it  is
              highly  likely  the  Ukrainian  authorities  would  hand  the
              appellant over to the Russian authorities on the basis  there
              was no evidence to indicate the Russian authorities  actively
              sought extradition of the appellant and no evidence  to  show
              the appellant is on a Federal wanted list, despite his  claim
              to  so  be.  The  Judge  finds  there  was  nothing  in   the
              documentation place before him or the  experts  report  which
              refers to extradition of persons from Ukraine  to  Russia  on
              religious grounds. [49].
        xiii. The Judge notes that whereas the expert report claims it  was
              likely the appellant will be viewed as  a  betrayer  for  the
              fact he had lived a long time in Russia and married a Russian
              national, that was not the basis on which the claim was made.
                The  Judge  finds  other  aspects  of  the  expert   report
              speculative for the reason stated at [49].  The  Judge  finds
              there was nothing to show that  it  was  likely  that  Russia
              would seek the extradition of the appellant simply because he
              had been a practising Jehovah's Witness  whilst  residing  in
              Russia. The Judge notes the appellant's own evidence  he  did
              not  have  any  significant   problems   with   the   Russian
              authorities prior to  March  2019  and  despite  having  been
              detained had been released by the Russian  authorities  which
              did not suggest they would have the motivation  to  seek  his
              extradition  from  Ukraine.  The  Judge  finds  he  was   not
              satisfied to the necessary standard  the  appellant  will  be
              extradited from Ukraine  to  Russia  and  was  satisfied  the
              appellant could be returned to Ukraine without  the  risk  of
              being extradited to Russia [49].
         xiv.  In  relation  to  appellant's  wife  the  Judge  noted   the
              submission she would not be allowed to enter Ukraine  as  she
              does not live there in relation to which the Judge  finds  it
              will be possible for the appellant to go to Ukraine  and  for
              his wife to make an application to join him in Ukraine as the
              wife of Ukrainian national. The Judge finds this had not been
              shown not to be the case [50].
          xv. The Judge dismisses the appeal pursuant to articles 2  and  3
              and other protection grounds on the basis the  appellant  had
              failed  to  demonstrate  he  has  a  well-founded   fear   of
              persecution on return to Ukraine.
         xvi. The  Judge  notes  the  appellant's  representative  did  not
              address him on Appendix FM or paragraph 276 ADE and  nor  was
              any such claim made in the grounds.  It was not made out  the
              appellant or his wife could succeed on human rights  grounds,
              either within or outside the Immigration Rules [55].




Grounds and submissions



     5. The grounds assert the Judge erred in law as it was accepted by the
        Judge that the Ukrainian authorities had been  to  the  appellant's
        family home looking for him on  the  day  he  failed  to  answer  a
        summons. The grounds assert the Judge's finding that  the  evidence
        did not support a  claim  the  Russian  authorities  were  actively
        seeking extradition is irrational as the attendance at  the  family
        home by the Ukrainian authorities showed an arguable real  risk  of
        refoulement.
     6. The grounds assert the Judge has  not  assessed  the  risk  to  the
        appellant and his wife for failing to answer the summons.
     7. The grounds assert the Judge accepted the expert report in relation
        to past persecution  and  future  risk  in  Russia  but  failed  to
        rationally explain why the experts evidence on risk on  return  was
        not accepted.
     8. The grounds assert the Judge erred in speculating that it  was  not
        made out the appellant's wife shall not be admitted to Ukraine  for
        if she is not and is refused entry  she  will  have  to  travel  to
        Russia where it was found there was a real risk of persecution.
     9. The appellant asserted the Judge needed a clear evidential basis on
        which to determine that return of the appellant's wife  to  Ukraine
        would be safe, durable, and lawful, which it is argued was not made
        out.
    10. The Secretary of State, in her Rule 24 reply, wrote:


         The respondent opposes the appellant's  appeal.   In  summary,  the
         respondent will submit inter alia that the judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal directed himself appropriately and gave  adequate  reasons
         for his findings.


         The respondent submits that the Judge  of  the  FTT  gave  adequate
         reasons for finding that the appellant and his  wife  continued  to
         practise  the  Jehovah's  Witness  face  (Para  41)  and  that  the
         appellant would have no well-founded  fear  of  being  a  Jehovah's
         Witness in  Ukraine (Para 42).


         The Judge of the FTT proceeded to consider  the  appellant's  claim
         that he would be  extradited  to  Russia.   Having  considered  the
         appellant's account of his difficulties in  Russia,  the  documents
         submitted by the appellant, the  expert  report  and  the  relevant
         background evidence,  the  Judge  of  the  FTT  accepted  that  the
         appellant and his wife had been arrested and detained in Russia and
         would be at risk of persecution if they returned there.


         The Judge of the FTT accepted that the appellant would be  returned
         to Ukraine and gave adequate reasons for finding that the appellant
         was not at risk of extradition to Russia and  had  not  established
         that he was on the Federal wanted list.


         The respondent submits that the Judge  of  the  FTT  did  note  the
         expert's opinion that it was highly probable that the appellant was
         on the Federal wanted list, but it was open to  him  to  find  that
         there was no satisfactory evidence to support this opinion.


         The Judge  of  the  FTT  had  regard  to  the  background  evidence
         regarding the evidence of political prisoners being exchanged,  but
         made findings that were open to him that there was no  satisfactory
         evidence that Russia sought extradition of  members  of  prohibited
         religions from Ukraine or other countries.   It  was  open  to  the
         Judge of the FTT to conclude that the fact that the  appellant  and
         his wife were released after 5 days' detention indicated that  they
         would not be of high enough importance that the Russian authorities
         would seek their extradition.


         The respondent submits that the Judge of the FTT had regard to  the
         evidence from the appellant's mother and gave adequate reasons  for
         giving it little weight (Para 48).  It was open to the Judge of the
         FTT to find  that  even  if  the  Ukrainian  authorities  had  been
         requested to ascertain the appellant's whereabouts, that  was  some
         distance from actively seeking his extradition.


         The respondent submits that the Judge of the FTT considered all the
         evidence in the round and gave adequate reasons for  finding  there
         was no  evidence  that  the  Russian  authorities  had  sought  the
         appellant's extradition or that he was on the Federal  wanted  list
         and that he would not be at risk of extradition if returned to  the
         Ukraine (Para 49).


         The  Judge  of  the  FTT  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's wife is Russian but gave adequate reasons  for  finding
         that she could apply to join the appellant in Ukraine as his wife.


         The respondent submits that the determination discloses no material
         error of  law  and  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  represent  mere
         disagreement with the conclusions of the Judge of the FTT.


    11. Mr Hussain in his reply dated  12 June 2020 wrote:


         REPLY TO SSHD'S RESPONSE


         1. OA seeks to respond  to  the  SSHD's  "response  to  directions"
            dated, 8thJune 2020as follows.


         2. OA  wishes  to   repeat   his   request   for   an   oral   EofL
            hearing  and  refers  the Tribunal to his  submissions  in  this
            regard dated, 24thMay 2020 [#1-11].


         3. In respect to the SSHD's response to directions, OA avers  that:
            i. The response is largely  generic;  simply  stating  that  the
            reasoning of the FTT was adequate. ii.  The  response  does  not
            engage with the detailed grounds of appeal.


         4. The SSHD has failed to explain how it was rationale for the  FTT
            to conclude that  the  attendance  of  Ukrainian police  at  his
            Mother's  home on  the  day he and  his  wife failed  to  answer
             to  bail  was not  indicative  of  the   Ukrainian  authorities
            acting  on  behalf  of the  Russians.    Moreover,   that   this
            is  a  strong indicator that there exists a reasonable degree of
            likelihood they would do so again if OA returns to the Ukraine.


         5. The submission that OA's wife can "apply to join [him]... in the
            Ukraine"  fails  to  deal  with  the   following   obvious   and
            insuperable issues: i. OA's wife would have to first  return  to
            Russia, where it was accepted she was detained and  ill-treated;
            ii. She  has breached  her  bail  conditions (for  an   accepted
            persecutory prosecution) by failing to surrender and leaving the
            country illegally; iii. The SSHD/FTT  failed  to refer  to   any
            evidence supporting the  finding that she could  return  to  the
            Ukraine directly and remain there; iv. The SSHD  has  failed  to
            show why she would not be removed to Russia if   she   attempted
               to    enter    the    Ukraine  and    reside  without   prior
            permission.


         6. As the UT will have picked up from the statements of both OA and
            his wife; she was heavily pregnant(8  months)  at  the  date  of
            hearing.  The FTT failed to
           grapple  with  how she  could  be placed  on  an   aircraft   in
           light  of  this and returned in   any event.


         7. Finally,  there is  now  a  baby  to consider and  although   it
            is accepted that  this was not  a  matter  before  the  FTT,  it
            cannot now be ignored.




Error of law


    12. It is not disputed that the authorities  in  Russia  have  targeted
        followers of the Jehovah's Witness faith in the country and that if
        suspected a common charge in Russia for Jehovah's  witnesses  under
        Article 282.2(1) of the Russian Criminal Code is  "Organisation  of
        the  activity  of  a  social  or  religious  association  or  other
        organization in relation to which a court has  adopted  a  decision
        legally  in  force  on  liquidation  or  ban  on  the  activity  in
        connection with the carrying out of  extremist  activity."   It  is
        also accepted there has been a ban on  the  movement  of  Jehovah's
        Witnesses in Russia since 2017 based on the law against extremism.
    13. Notwithstanding such restrictions the Judge was entitled to note at
        the end of [45] surprise as to how the appellant and his wife,  who
        had been arrested by the authorities in Russia as a result of their
        beliefs and practices as Jehovah's Witnesses, were released without
        any evidence of their being charged under the Russian Criminal Code
        or of any evidence being provided of restrictions being placed upon
        their movements.
    14. The appellant claims that the evidence from his mother should  have
        been given greater weight than it was by the Judge.  That  evidence
        was clearly considered by the Judge who makes a specific  reference
        to it [48] of the decision in the following terms:


        "I have taken note of the evidence put  before  me  by  way  of  an
        undated letter from [HLH], she refers to a visit on 25  June  2019,
        the date on which the  Appellant  should  have  attended  upon  the
        authorities in Russia in accordance with the  summons  of  25th  of
        June 2019 by the Prosecutor's Office in Ukraine who are looking for
        her son. Attending again in October  2019.  The  evidence  in  this
        letter would suggest  that  the  Ukrainian  authorities  have  been
        requested by the Russian authorities to look for the Appellant.  As
        the writer of the letter was not in attendance at the hearing, I do
        find that this limits the weight which I can give to  this  letter,
        although I do find that the reference to the attendance on 25  June
        2019 is consistent with the copy of the summons returnable  the  25
        June 2019 which I had also considered. It is  of  course  the  case
        that even if the Ukrainian authorities had been  requested  by  the
        Russian authorities to ascertain the whereabouts of the  Appellant,
        that is some distance away from the  Russian  authorities  actively
        seeking extradition of the Appellant in the event that he had  been
        located in Ukraine."


    15. The letter purportedly from the appellant's mother was  accompanied
        by a translation  into  English.  The  original  is  a  handwritten
        document. The translation is in the following terms:


        My name is [HLH]. I am 46 years old, my address is [~].  I  am  the
        mother of Oleksandr [A], I am writing this letter at his request in
        order to tell you about the events that I witnessed from the 3 June
        2019 till the end of October.


        On 25.06.19 in the first half of the day a blue police car came  to
        me in the first half of the day, I live on  my  own  in  a  private
        house, and a man in a police uniform came  in  to  my  address.  He
        later introduced himself as the District police officer of our  and
        the neighbouring villages. I was surprised because I can't remember
        any occasion when the police would come to my house.


        He started his conversation with the following words,  "I  need  to
        have a serious conversation with you  because  I  have  received  a
        request  from  the  General  Prosecutor's  Office  of  Ukraine   to
        establish the whereabouts of your son at  the  moment".  I  replied
        that my son had been living outside of Ukraine for a long time,  he
        was married in Russia and he lived  there.  He  said  that  he  had
        information that my son could be in Ukraine. I was shocked  by  his
        words because at that time I knew that my son and his  wife  Albina
        were persecuted in Russia for being Jehovah's Witnesses but  I  was
        totally unaware that it could have reached Ukraine, our village.  I
        told him that I knew the reason my children were  being  persecuted
        in Russia and how they could put him on the wanted list in Ukraine.
        I said that they were persecuted by the current regime that he  did
        not want to listen, he just started entering my house while pushing
        me away. I told him, "you are not entitled to break into my private
        property" but he still entered, which caused me to shout.


        He looked inside the kitchen and the two  rooms  from  the  hallway
        without entering, maybe my shouting stopped him.    After  that  he
        went outside and opened the door of the garage. I had an impression
        that he did  not  care  what  I  was  saying.  By  that  time  some
        neighbours came outside and saw him coming out of my house and walk
        into the garage. I said again, "you are not allowed to  break  into
        my house", to which he just smiled and came outside. He went to  my
        neighbours and asked them what they knew about the  whereabouts  of
        my son. Then he left.


        After this, at the beginning  of  October,  he  came  again  to  me
        pretending that he was just passing by. He  jokingly  asked,  "have
        your children come?" Because he found it hard  to  believe  that  I
        didn't know about their whereabouts.


        Later, at the end of November  our  Head  of  the  Village  Council
        Victor [K] came to me and said that he had received  a  phone  call
        from Sokyryany and they want me to go  to  the  police  station  in
        Sokyryany at 2 Yaroslava Mudroho Street, at 10:00 on the  following
        day, which scared me a lot.  I told Victor that I was afraid to  go
        there and I didn't understand what they wanted from me  but  Victor
        said, "don't be afraid, the  police  just  want  to  ask  you  some
        questions".


        On the following day I arrived  at  the  address  given  to  me  by
        Victor. I was met by the police investigator Vitaliy [K],  he  told
        Miss to sit down and started to politely with me, I can't down  and
        thought that he was a normal officer and will be able to understand
        my situation.


        I told him about the situation in general, about Russia,  about  my
        children are being persecuted it there, about the  District  police
        officer that had come to me and would not even  listen  to  me.  He
        listened to all of this and I got the impression that he understood
        me. But when I finished his manner  changed,  he  became  rude,  he
        started saying that "they are innocent  children  for  you  but  we
        received an enquiry from Russia according to which the situation is
        completely different". He said, "your son has broken the law there,
        he attempted to destabilise the situation, and  instead  of  living
        normally he is involved in  the  propaganda  of  subversive  ideas,
        distributing leaflets, so it is not that innocent", this is what he
        said.


        I said that  my  son  was  a  citizen  of  Ukraine  and  he  should
        understand the lawlessness and the kind of authorities in Russia. I
        said, "how can you treat my son like this?" At this point he jumped
        up from his chair and started abusing me loudly,  saying,  "is  not
        your right to judge, your son has broken the law, I  have  received
        the enquiry and my job is to find him and put him  to  justice.  As
        far as the citizenship is concerned, the enquiry  says  he  is  the
        citizen of the Russian Federation and I would not be  surprised  if
        he had a dual citizenship which is illegal". At  the  end  he  said
        that if I knew something about Alexandra and  Albina's  whereabouts
        it would be better for me if I notified him.


    16. The appellant is not a citizen of  the  Russian  Federation  but  a
        citizen of Ukraine. Whilst there may  be  merit  in  enquiry  being
        received from Russia in relation to a Russian citizen the Judge was
        arguably  entitled  to  express  scepticism  as  to   whether   the
        authorities in Ukraine  would  extradite  a  Ukrainian  citizen  to
        Russia on the basis of his religious beliefs. It is also a credible
        observation by the Judge that even if the  authorities  in  Ukraine
        had been asked to trace the whereabouts of the appellant there  was
        no evidence that the  Russian  authorities  were  actively  seeking
        extradition in the event the appellant had been located in Ukraine.
        It is also the case that the material provided, whilst it speaks of
        the exchange of political prisoners of both sides, and whilst there
        is evidence in the news of the exchange of captured  combatants  in
        the area of conflict in the east of Ukraine, there is  no  material
        upon which the Judge was entitled to place weight  indicating  that
        such arrangements apply to  those  wanted  as  a  result  of  their
        following the Jehovah's Witness faith  or  other  religious  groups
        deemed of concern to the authorities in Russia.
    17. The appellant has provided within the papers  copy  documents  with
        accompanying  translations  said  to  have  been  issued   by   the
        Investigative  Committee  of   Russia,   The   Main   Investigation
        Department of the Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation
        in the city of Moscow on the 21 June 2019 at 11:30 hours  addressed
        to the appellant and headed "Summons  for  interrogation  "ordering
        the appellant to attend at the Main Investigate the  Department  at
        the address stated on 25 June 2019 at 9.15 hours. The appellant did
        not attend as he was not in Russia and it appears that the  summons
        had been sent by post to him at an address in Moscow.  The  claimed
        chronology indicates that within a very short period of time of his
        not  attending  the  authorities  in  Russia  had   contacted   the
        authorities in Ukraine who dispatched a police officer on the  same
        day, according to  the  letter  from  the  appellant's  mother  who
        arrived in the first half  of  the  same  day,  to  ask  where  the
        appellant was. The Judge does not comment upon this chronology.  It
        is accepted that under Russian procedural law, if  a  defendant  is
        sent a summons but failed to turn up, service would  be  deemed  to
        have been validly  affected.   The  document  relied  upon  by  the
        appellant, the  Russian  summons,  sets  out  the  consequences  of
        failing to appear in the following terms: "In case of a failure  to
        appear on the specified date without valid reason on the  basis  of
        article 113 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of Russian Federation
        you can be the subject of detention on the basis of article 118  of
        the Code of Criminal Procedure of Russian  Federation  a  pecuniary
        penalty may be imposed on you". Article 113 states:


        Article 113. Forcible Bringing to Court


        1.   If they fail to appear at the summons without serious reasons,
             the suspect and the accused, as well as  the  victim  and  the
             witness, may be brought forcibly.
        2.   A forcible bringing shall consist in taking the  person  under
             coercion to the  inquirer,  the  investigator  or  the  public
             prosecutor, or to the court.
        3.   If there exist some reasons, interfering with their appearance
             in response to the summons at  the  fixed  time,  the  persons
             mentioned in the first part of this Article, shall immediately
             inform to this effect  the  body,  by  which  they  have  been
             summoned.
        4.   The resolution of the inquirer, the investigator,  the  public
             prosecutor or of the judge, or the ruling of the court on  the
             forcible bringing shall be announced before its  execution  to
             the person  who  is  going  to  be  subjected  to  a  forcible
             bringing, which shall be certified with his signature  on  the
             resolution or on the ruling.
        5.   A forcible bringing cannot be carried out at the  night  time,
             save for the instances when the matter brooks no delay.
        6.   Not subject to a forcible bringing shall be the minor who have
             not reached fourteen years of age, pregnant  women,  and  sick
             persons who cannot leave the place of their stay on account of
             poor health, which shall be certified by a doctor.
        7.   A forcible bringing shall be effected by the bodies of inquiry
             under a judgement of the inquirer,  the  investigator  or  the
             public  prosecutor,  and  also  by  bailiffs  responsible  for
             ensuring the observance of the established courtroom procedure
             - on the orders of the court.


    18. What was not made out before the Judge is that if a person fails to
        attend a summons on these facts the next stage would not have  been
        to issue a warrant for their arrest. Despite this,  the  chronology
        relied upon by the appellant seems to suggest  that  the  immediate
        action, rather than take such a step, by  the  Russian  authorities
        was to seek the appellant's whereabouts in a  completely  different
        country. The suggestion in the grounds the Judge accepted the issue
        of the summons by the authorities in Ukraine at the behest  of  the
        Russian authorities is not a finding that was specifically made  by
        the Judge who finds that notwithstanding the reference to  25  June
        2019 only little weight could be attached to the  letter  from  the
        appellant's mother. No arguable irrationality or material error  is
        made out in the Judge's conclusion as to the applicable weight.
    19. In relation to the core issue of the risk of refoulement it is  not
        made out the Judge erred in law in finding there  was  insufficient
        evidence provided by the appellant to support  his  claim  that  he
        faced a real risk of being returned  to  Russia  by  the  Ukrainian
        authorities if he was returned there by the UK.
    20. The claim the appellant may appear on a shared database is also  an
        issue of concern to the Judge.
    21. The Judge's core findings at [49], in which he draws the threads of
        the assessment of  the  evidence  together,  disclose  no  arguable
        material legal error.
    22. In relation to Ground 2, the claim the appellant's wife will not be
        able to return to Ukraine with the appellant and may have to return
        to Russia to make such a claim which will subject  her  to  a  real
        risk the result of previous activities, the respondent's  intention
        to return the appellant to the Ukraine's has been  clear  from  the
        receipt of the reasons for refusal letter. Despite  the  assertions
        made by the appellant's wife no evidence was  provided  to  support
        the contention that she would not be able to return.  At  [50]  the
        Judge finds:


        In his submissions the Appellant's  Representative  suggested  that
        the Appellant's wife, a dependent on his asylum application, cannot
        be returned to Ukraine as she does not reside there.  He  submitted
        that the reference in the Refusal letter to  the  Appellant's  wife
        going to Ukraine with him is speculation. It is the case  that  the
        Appellant is a Ukrainian national and on the basis of  my  findings
        would not be at risk in the event of return to  Ukraine.  It  would
        therefore be possible for the Appellant to go to  Ukraine  and,  as
        stated in the Refusal letter, the Appellant's wife  could  make  an
        application to join the Appellant in  Ukraine  as  the  wife  of  a
        Ukrainian national. On the basis of my findings the Appellant would
        not be at risk upon return to Ukraine as a result of his  religious
        beliefs and as a Ukrainian national, I do not consider  that  there
        is any reason why this should not be the case.


    23. As there is no evidence of any application having been made to  the
        Immigration Authorities in Ukraine from the UK or otherwise for  an
        Immigration Permit to enable the appellant's spouse  to  travel  to
        Ukraine or join him, there was no evidence that she would be unable
        to  secure  such.  Immigration  permits  issued  by  the  Ukrainian
        immigration services beyond the established  quotas  include  those
        granted to a spouse if the other spouse with whom he/she is married
        for longer than two years is  a  Ukrainian  citizen;  children  and
        parents of Ukrainian citizens. The burden of proving an immigration
        permit could  not  be  secured  by  the  appellant's  life  without
        returning to Russia fell upon the person so alleging which  is  the
        appellant. As no enquiries or application had been made  the  Judge
        was arguably entitled to find the appellant's  claim  was  no  more
        than speculation.
    24. Mr Hussain also referred to the fact that  since  the  hearing  the
        child has now been born to the appellant and his wife but that  was
        not the situation that existed at the date of  the  hearing  before
        the Judge even though the appellant's wife  was  pregnant  at  that
        time. If the birth give rise to issues  that  warrant  a  right  to
        remain in the United Kingdom it is always open to the appellants to
        make a further claim which the respondent can consider pursuant  to
        paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.


Decision

    25. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
           Dated the 13 August 2020


