
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12845/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House, Newport |Decision  &  Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On: 22 January 2018                  |On: 21 February 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     HOA
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:      Ms L Fenney, NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Suffield-Thompson in which she allowed the appeal of the Appellant,
         a citizen of Nigeria born on 6 January 1983, against the  Secretary
         of State's decision to refuse  her  application  for  asylum.  This
         appeal is brought by the Secretary of State but to avoid  confusion
         I have referred to the parties in the manner they were referred  to
         before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 18 February 2012  as
         a student and was granted leave to remain until 12 October 2013. On
         9 September 2013 she applied for a Residence Card as the spouse  of
         an EEA national. This was a sham marriage and the application for a
         Residence Card  was  fraudulent.  The  Appellant  was  charged  and
         convicted of the offence of conspiracy to facilitate the commission
         of  a  breach  of  immigration  law  and  sentenced  to  22  months
         imprisonment. The  Respondent  issued  a  Notice  of  Liability  to
         Deportation and in response the Appellant made  representations  on
         human rights  and  protection  grounds.   On  26  November  2014  a
         deportation decision was made against the Appellant's daughter [HI]
         (born on [ ] 2014). On 7 November  2016  a  decision  was  made  to
         deport the Appellant and to refuse her human rights and  protection
         claim and her application  for  a  Residence  Card.  The  Appellant
         appealed this decision with her daughter as her dependent. This  is
         the appeal that came before Judge Suffield-Thompson on 10  February
         2017 and was allowed.  The Respondent's application for  permission
         to appeal against the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  was
         refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 14 June  2017  but  on
         renewal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  25  August  2017  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic in the following terms

             "The respondent challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal
             Judge Suffield-Thompson to allow the  appellant's  deportation
             appeal on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.  The  appellant
             claimed she feared Boko Haram if returned to Nigeria and  also
             that her daughter would be subjected to FGM.

             The grounds argue that the  judge  erred  in  his  credibility
             assessment and on the issues of sufficiency of protection  and
             internal relocation.

             For the reasons set out  in  both  sets  of  the  respondent's
             grounds for permission, it is arguable  that  the  judge  made
             errors of law. Permission is granted and all the  grounds  may
             be argued.

    Background

      3. The Appellant's immigration history is detailed above. She is a 35-
         year-old citizen  of  Nigeria.  She  came  to  the  United  Kingdom
         lawfully as a student and her  presence  remained  lawful  for  one
         year. Having been convicted of serious criminal offences and  being
         notified of her liability  to  deportation  the  Appellant  made  a
         protection claim. The claim as summarised  at  screening  interview
         was

             "I was abused as a child and I fear being abused again  and  I
             also fear for my new daughter with Boko Haram and my country's
             'policy' with FGM. This in  line  with  the  general  lack  of
             security and safety".

         This was expanded upon at  her  asylum  interview.  Her  claim  was
         refused by way of a very detailed refusal  letter.  At  the  appeal
         hearing the Judge notes (paragraph 35) that the key disputed matter



             "... is to establish the credibility of the Appellant".

         She finds (paragraph 41) that the Appellant is

             "... happy to  mislead  the  authorities  when  it  suits  her
             purpose".

         Referring to her fear  of  her  step-father  the  Judge  finds  (at
         paragraph 42)

             "... that this story is told by the Appellant in  her  attempt
             to remain in the UK".

         Turning to the issue of FGM and the Appellant's claimed  fears  for
         her daughter the Judge looks at the corroborative evidence from the
         Appellant's mother and finds

             "...  these  letters  have  been  written  and  sent  at   the
             instigation of the Appellant to bolster her case".

         The Judge then goes on to consider background  evidence  and  finds
         (at paragraph 54) that the Appellant

             "... does have a legitimate and  well-founded  fear  that  her
             child will be the subject of FGM"

         and that she would not be able to  rely  on  state  protection.  At
         paragraph 56 the Judge finds

             "As the Appellant would be financially dependent on her mother
             and step father I find it more likely than not that she  would
             be unable to prevent her child being subjected to FGM if  that
             is what her mother decided should happen".

         The Judge goes on to consider the Appellant's claim  to  have  been
         sexually abused by her step father against the background  evidence
         and finds that the Appellant

             "... would be very vulnerable in that household where her step-
             father had and is still likely to have  control  over  her  in
             some way of another" (paragraph 59).

      4. The grounds of appeal submit that the finding at paragraph  56  and
         the finding that she was abused by her  step  father  is  not  well
         reasoned. It is submitted that the finding of lack  of  sufficiency
         of protection is inconsistent with  the  objective  evidence  which
         shows that FGM is illegal in Nigeria. The finding that there is  no
         internal relocation alternative gives inadequate reasons as to  why
         it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate.

    Submissions

      5. At the hearing before me Mr Richards appeared for the Secretary  of
         State and Ms Fenney represented the Appellant. There was no rule 24
         response and no skeleton arguments were submitted.

      6. Mr Richards said that the grounds  are  lengthy  and  detailed  and
         highlight  the  credibility  issue.  The  Judge   does   not   make
         sufficiently clear findings as to why there was a subjectively good
         reason to fear FGM given her adverse credibility  findings.  A  key
         issue was the recent correspondence  from  the  Appellant's  mother
         referred to at paragraph 44 - a letter written and sent to  bolster
         the Appellant's claim.  At  paragraph  53  the  Judge  quotes  some
         authorities but makes findings that  are  not  supported  by  those
         authorities. She fails to deal with sufficiency of protection other
         than by a general reference at paragraph 55. Internal relocation is
         dealt with at paragraph 60 in an equally  generalised  manner.  The
         Judge fails to deal with the fact that the Appellant is an educated
         woman who had a thriving career in Nigeria as a banker.  She  could
         resume her career and relocate in necessary.

      7. For the Appellant Ms Fenney said that the Judge was  aware  of  the
         credibility issue relating to the Appellant but was  assessing  the
         risk to the Appellant's daughter. The Judge makes  clear  findings.
         If the Appellant is returned  to  Nigeria  to  the  same  situation
         living with her mother and step-father, she faces the potential  of
         her daughter being abused and subject to FGM. The Judge's reasoning
         is sound.

    Decision

      8. In my judgement the grounds are made out. The  Judge  makes  strong
         adverse credibility findings including that the Appellant will  say
         anything to suit her own purposes, that she has contrived  a  story
         to stay in the UK and that she has  instigated  the  submission  of
         letters from her mother to falsely corroborate  that  story.  Those
         adverse credibility findings extend to a specific finding that  the
         Appellant's claim to fear her step-father is a story  told  by  the
         Appellant to enhance her  claim  to  stay.  Despite  this  specific
         finding the Judge goes on to say that she would  be  vulnerable  if
         she returned to  live  with  her  step-father.  This  is  a  wholly
         inconsistent finding and one that has  a  material  effect  on  the
         decision to allow the appeal because part of  the  reason  why  the
         Judge finds it would be unsafe for the Appellant and  her  daughter
         to return is her finding that would have no alternative other  than
         to live with the Appellant's mother and step-father.

      9. There  are  similar  difficulties  with  the  Judge's  findings  in
         relation to  the  likelihood  of  the  Appellant's  daughter  being
         subjected to FGM. Firstly, the Judge finds that the letter  written
         by the Appellant's mother to support her claim is one

             "... written and sent at the instigation of the  Appellant  to
             bolster her case".

         The  clear  implication  is  that  the  Appellant  has   sufficient
         influence over her mother to cause her to  submit  false  evidence.
         The Judge goes on to find at paragraph 47

             "On the basis that the Appellant was subjected to FGM does not
             mean automatically mean (sic) that this  is  what  her  mother
             would do to her grandchild as many years have  passed  and  it
             may well be  that  the  mother  has  now  changed  her  views.
             However, I have nothing before me to  say  that  this  is  the
             case".

         Despite  this  finding  the  Judge,  having  considered   objective
         evidence showing, inter alia, that  27%  of  girls  and  women  had
         undergone FGM in Nigeria, goes on to find

             "... this Appellant does have a  legitimate  and  well-founded
             fear that her child will be the subject of FGM".

         In my judgment this  finding  has  no  reasoned  or  logical  basis
         particularly given the fact that it must be clear  from  the  whole
         basis of the Appellant's claim  that  the  Appellant,  an  educated
         woman who has influence over her mother, is against FGM  and  would
         seek to protect her daughter against being subjected to it.

     10. These two matters are fundamental to the  decision  to  allow  this
         appeal. The Judge's findings in these respects are  not  adequately
         reasoned and this inadequate reasoning amounts to a material  error
         of law. I allow  the  Respondent's  appeal  and  I  set  aside  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Summary

     11. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of
         material errors of law.

     12. I allow the Respondent's appeal. The error of law is such that I am
         satisfied that the Appellant's appeal has not been fully considered
         by the First-tier Tribunal and as such the  appropriate  course  in
         accordance with the President's guidance is to remit the matter  to
         the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.








      Date: 16 February 2018
    J F W Phillips
    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
