
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12590/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 June 2017                               |On 29 June 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                               DMYTRO NESTEROV
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagistopdviou of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant claims to be a citizen of  Ukraine,  born  on  20  March
    2016.  He appealed against the respondent's decision refusing to  grant
    him asylum and humanitarian protection in the  United  Kingdom.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff in a decision promulgated on  30  December
    2016, dismissed the appellant's appeal.

2.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford
    who found that it is arguable that the first-tier Tribunal Judge  erred
    in his findings as to the  appellant's  knowledge  that  the  Hungarian
    passport on which he was travelling was not genuine and its findings on
    the reliability of Ukrainian documents produced  by  the  appellant  in
    support of his claim. It was further argued that the Tribunal may  have
    erred in its approach to an expert report regarding the authenticity of
    the documents.

3.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  his  decision  made  the  following
    findings which I set out in summary.  The  appellant  claims  to  be  a
    Ukrainian national who did basic military training, but no more,  while
    he was studying management at an Institute in Trenopil.  He  claims  to
    have avoided for military service because he was a professional kayaker
    from the age of 12 and turned professional when he started his  studies
    in 2005 and was the national champion of Ukraine in 2007.

   4. He claims that on 31 July 2014 he received summons to  report  to  the
      army and to be placed on active duty. He went into hiding and  avoided
      the military who came looking for him at his home. His agent  arranged
      his Hungarian nationality and assisted  his  wife  to  travel  to  the
      United Kingdom by lorry at a cost of E3000. He  claims  that  a  court
      summons arrived on 27th or 29 January 2015 informing  him  that  there
      was a hearing set for 3 February 2015. He contacted the agent  and  it
      told  him  to  speed  up  the  process  of  securing   his   Hungarian
      citizenship. The appellant prepared to leave Hungary  on  25  February
      2015. He claims he was booked into a hotel  and  given  the  Hungarian
      text he needed to learn  to  get  his  passport.  He  claims  that  he
      attended a citizenship ceremony and gave the oath  reciting  the  text
      even though he did not understand it.

   5. He then went to the passport office to pay E30  fees  and  three  days
      later, his agent delivered the passport to his hotel. When he examined
      the passport, he realised that the name and date of birth  was  wrong.
      He tried to contact the agent who told him that there had been a  mix-
      up between himself and another person and it would take a lot of  time
      and money to resolve it. On his agent's assurances, he  believed  that
      the Hungarian passport was legitimate. He could not afford the time or
      the money to correct the passport and decided to travel to the  United
      Kingdom through Poland arriving in this country on 1 April 2015.


   6. The appellant genuinely  believed  that  the  Hungarian  passport  was
      genuine and not a forgery. It was only when he made an application  to
      marry did the forgery come to light after he was  interviewed  by  the
      Home Office. The Home Office officials searched his house, in his  and
      his wife's absence and their housemate  with  whom  had  been  sharing
      their flat disappeared on that very day and has not been  seen  since.
      The false passports found in their flat belonged to the man and not to
      them.

   7. The Judge did not accept the appellant or his wife's explanation  that
      they believed that the Hungarian passport was legitimate and that they
      were entitled to rely on it at any stage. There  are  several  reasons
      for this but the simple reason is that the name and date of  birth  in
      the document was completely wrong. The Judge did not believe that  the
      appellant could possibly have believed  that  the  difference  in  the
      details was simply a mistake or  that  he  was  entitled  to  use  the
      passport. He found it simply not believable that the  appellant  would
      genuinely believe, that he was legitimately entitled to a passport  in
      a completely different name with a completely incorrect date of birth.
      The Judge found that the appellant's insistence that he did  not  know
      that the Hungarian passport was a  forgery,  fundamentally  undermines
      any credibility he might have.


   8. The Judge found that if the appellant thought that he  had  a  genuine
      passport, their attempt to marry in the United Kingdom was part  of  a
      concerted effort to hide the appellant's Hungarian nationality and the
      couple's previous legal marriage.


   9.  The  appellant's  wife's  conduct  at  the  marriage  interview  also
      demonstrates that the appellant and his wife knew that  the  Hungarian
      passport was a forgery. When his wife was asked  her  husband's  name,
      she gave the name in the Hungarian passport and not his real name.  It
      was only when the name of the person in the passport was put  to  her,
      she said that it was her third cousin and said  she  was  not  feeling
      well.


  10. When the appellant was interviewed, he maintained  that  he  was  from
      Hungary and that he had gone to school in Hungary. He  maintained  his
      claim that he obtained the Hungarian passport from the Embassy and had
      not been able to go through an interview in  Hungarian.  He  disclosed
      that he had entered  Hungary  using  the  Ukrainian  passport  in  his
      current name. When the appellant was asked why the Hungarian  passport
      was in the name of Atilla Gulyas, he said that he had wanted to change
      his name. The Judge found that it is quite clear  that  the  appellant
      and his wife both attempted  to  maintain  their  deceptions  at  some
      length when they were being interviewed by the Home Office about their
      marriage.


  11. If  the  appellant  and  his  wife  believe  that  the  appellant  was
      legitimately entitled to the Hungarian passport and  the  false  name,
      they would have simply disclosed the details at the  outset  of  their
      marriage interview. The only explanation for the behaviour of both the
      appellant and his wife at this stage is that they knew that it  was  a
      false passport and that the appellant was not entitled to hold it from
      the very beginning. If the appellant believed the  Hungarian  passport
      was legitimate, he could simply have applied for a residence card  for
      his wife disclosing both names and explaining that he had changed  his
      name as he claimed to have done in the marriage interview.


  12. In respect of  the  documents,  the  Judge  noted  that  the  original
      documents have never been provided to the Home Office or to the expert
      who  purportedly  verified  them.  The   expert   who   produced   the
      verification report was not made aware of the appellant's history when
      he was asked to verify the documents and he was not made aware of  the
      specific history of document forgery. The expert does  not  appear  to
      have considered  the  possibility  of  the  appellant  producing  fake
      documents. At its highest the expert does no  more  than  confirm  the
      documents  are  superficially  consistent  with   original   Ukrainian
      documents but that is exactly what one would expect of good forgeries.


  13. The appellant has not taken any steps to try and  legitimately  exempt
      himself from military service as the country  guidance  case  confirms
      that there are procedures for conscientious objection in Ukraine.  The
      appellant has also not engaged a  lawyer  to  act  on  his  behalf  or
      attempted to try and appeal the sentence given to him  given  that  it
      states that it is  appealable.  As  Ukraine  recognises  conscientious
      objectors, it is likely that the appellant  would  have  avoided  been
      called up for active combat service had he responded  to  the  summons
      and engaged with the procedures properly.


  14. At the hearing, I heard submissions from both parties  as  to  whether
      there is an error of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


   Is there a material error of law in the determination of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal

  15. I have taken into account the decision, the arguments of  the  parties
      on the evidence and I find that the Judge has made no  material  error
      of law in  the  decision,  real,  imagined  or  embryonic.  The  Judge
      concluded on cogent evidence that the appellant and his wife were  not
      telling the truth at the hearing about all matters. He also considered
      that the expert had not been given all the information  including  the
      original documents and all he could say is that they are superficially
      consistent with original Ukrainian documents. The Judge  was  entitled
      to say that whether  the  passport  looked  original  or  not  is  not
      relevant because good  forgeries  are  meant  to  look  like  original
      documents. Therefore, the fact that  the  appellant,  who  is  not  an
      expert, thought it looked like the original is not  pertinent  to  the
      fact  that  the  appellant  knew  that  the  document  with  which  he
      travelled, was not in the appellant's name and not his date and birth.
      The conclusion that the Judge came to is unassailable for the  reasons
      that he gave in his decision, for why the appellant knew that  he  was
      not entitled to use the document to travel.

  16. Furthermore, there was no evidence before the Judge that  he  compared
      the passport he  was  given  by  the  agent  with  any  other  genuine
      passports to determine whether it looked like  an  original  passport.
      The fact whether the passport may have looked genuine as forgeries are
      meant to look, the conduct of the appellant demonstrated to the  Judge
      that he knew that the passport was not original but a fake.  That  was
      the issue in the appeal. The Judge did consider the  experts  evidence
      in the round and found that it does not assist the appellant's appeal.


  17. The Judge gave many reasons for  his  findings  for  not  finding  the
      appellant or his wife credible. The first reason was that the passport
      was in a different name with a different date of birth  than  that  of
      the appellant. The judge was entitled to find the appellant, could not
      possibly have believed the passport was  genuine  with  the  incorrect
      name and date of birth. A passport essentially is an identity document
      and other than showing the identity of the person, does not have  much
      other information on it. Therefore, the name and the date of birth are
      the most relevant information in the passport. The  Judge  also  found
      that the appellant could not possibly have believed he was entitled to
      travel  on  this  document,  notwithstanding   the   agent's   claimed
      assurances. There is no irrationality or perversity in this  reasoning
      and finding.

  18. The Judge found that if the  appellant  had  thought  that  he  had  a
      genuine passport, there would have been no reason for him and his wife
      to attempt to marry again in the  United  Kingdom  because  they  were
      already married in Ukraine. The Judge was entitled to find  that  this
      was their plan to hide the appellant's Ukrainian nationality  and  the
      couple's previous legal marriage.


  19.  The  Judge  also  considered  appellant's  wife's  conduct   at   the
      respondent's marriage interview because when his wife was  asked  what
      her husband's name was, she gave her husband's name  on  the  passport
      and not his real name. The Judge was entitled  to  find  that  if  the
      appellant wife genuinely believed that the appellant was travelling on
      a valid passport, she would have  corrected  the  mistake  instead  of
      lying about her husband's name. This demonstrates that the appellant's
      wife was attempting to deceive. Furthermore, the Judge  did  not  find
      credible that when his wife was asked the was the person named in  the
      passport, she said that it was her third cousin after which  she  said
      she is not  feeling  well.  There  is  no  perversity  in  the  Judges
      reasoning and the conclusions that he came on the evidence before  him
      that the deception perpetrated by the appellant and his wife was clear
      for him to see.


  20. The Judge also found that the appellant and his  wife  maintain  their
      deception at some length  when  interviewed  by  the  Home  Office  in
      connection with their marriage. The appellant maintained that  he  was
      from Hungary and that he had gone to school in Hungary. He  maintained
      his claim that he obtained the Hungarian passport from the Embassy and
      had not been  able  to  go  through  an  interview  in  Hungarian.  He
      disclosed that he had entered Hungary using the Ukrainian passport  in
      his current name. When the  appellant  was  asked  why  the  Hungarian
      passport was in the name of Atilla Gulyas, he said that he had  wanted
      to change his name. If that was the case the Judge found the appellant
      could have declared this. This also demonstrated to the Judge that the
      appellant changes his name as there was no evidence for why he  wanted
      to change it.


  21. The Judge was entitled to find  that  the  only  explanation  for  the
      behaviour of both the appellant and his wife was that they  knew  that
      it was a false passport and that the appellant  was  not  entitled  to
      hold it from the very beginning. The Judge found that if the appellant
      genuinely believed the Hungarian passport  was  legitimate,  he  could
      simply have applied for a residence card for his wife disclosing  both
      names and explaining that he had changed his name.  I  find  that  the
      judge considered all the evidence and came to the only  conclusion  he
      could on it. There is no perversity or lack of proper reasoning.


  22. The Judge considered the reason given by  the  appellant  for  why  he
      wanted to leave the country in a hurry and why he could not  wait  for
      the date of birth and name to be changed, in his passport.  The  Judge
      properly found that is the end the appellant could  have  procedurally
      engaged with the summons issued to him for active military  duty,  The
      Judge was entitled to find that the appellant  could  have  engaged  a
      legal representative and or made representations  as  a  conscientious
      objector which is  permissible  by  the  government  of  Ukraine.  The
      appellant paid an agent for him and his wife  to  leave  the  country,
      which demonstrates that he had the money to have engaged a lawyer. The
      Judge was also entitled to find that the  appellant  had  a  right  of
      appeal which he could have exercised. Therefore, there would have been
      no reason for the appellant to leave the country in a hurry and  could
      not have waited for a passport with his correct name and date of birth
      to be issued to him. The Judge was entitled to find the very basis  of
      the appellant's claim that he had to leave the country in a hurry, was
      not credible and not accurate.

23. I find there has been no error of  law  in  the  decision,  material  or
   otherwise, in respect of the findings made by the Judge on  the  evidence
   before him. I therefore uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision. I also
   find that no differently constituted Tribunal would come to  a  different
   conclusion on the evidence, in this appeal.


Notice of Decision

24.   I therefore uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and
    I dismiss this appeal.


Signed                                             Date  24th  day  of  June
    2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                             Date  24th  day  of  June
    2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

