
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12457/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 13 February 2020                 |On: 4 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 15 June  1964.  He  has
    been given permission to appeal against the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to
    refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant last entered the United Kingdom on  26  April  2001  with
    entry clearance as a visitor,  valid  until  19  October  2001,  having
    previously entered the UK on 25 April 2000 and returned  to  Sri  Lanka
    after six months and then re-entered on 24 November 2000 and stayed for
    a further five to six month period before returning to Sri Lanka.

 3. On 3 July 2012 the appellant made an application for  indefinite  leave
    to remain on long residence/ human rights grounds,  referring  in  that
    application to his life being in danger on return  to  Sri  Lanka.  The
    application was refused on 20 May 2013 and a removal decision was  made
    on 4 June 2013. The appellant appealed against that  decision  and  his
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  and  then,
    following a grant of permission, was dismissed in the Upper Tribunal on
    30 April 2014. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was refused.
    On 22 June 2015 the appellant became appeal rights exhausted.

 4. The appellant then applied for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    private life on 9 June 2015. His application was rejected as he had not
    produced his passport. He made a further application on the same  basis
    on 8 October 2015, which was refused on 27 September 2016.  He  claimed
    asylum on 15 November 2016 and that claim, which is the subject of this
    appeal, was refused on 15 November 2017.

 5. The appellant's asylum claim was made on the basis that he was at  risk
    on return to Sri Lanka on suspicion of involvement with  the  LTTE.  He
    claimed that his problems began in 1999 when he rented out  his  family
    home to some Tamil people who  were  later  involved  with  the  Dalada
    Maligawa bombing and it was on that basis  that  he  was  suspected  of
    involvement with the LTTE. People had come to his home looking for  him
    and he feared the villagers as well as the Sri Lankan authorities.

 6. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim, noting that it  had  not
    been believed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Traynor  or  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The respondent noted  that  the  appellant  had  remained  in
    Colombo  for  two  years  after  the  incident  without  problems   and
    considered that he  was  at  no  risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  The
    respondent noted the appellant's claim that he suffered from depression
    and had experienced thoughts of  suicide  and  considered  the  medical
    evidence produced, but concluded that his removal would not breach  his
    human rights on Article 3 or 8 grounds.

 7. The appellant appealed against that  decision.  His  appeal  was  heard
    initially by First-tier Tribunal Judge Conrath on 20 November 2018  and
    was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 18  February  2019.  However
    Judge Conrath's decision was set aside  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a
    decision of 9 May 2019, whereby his findings on the appellant's  asylum
    and humanitarian protection claims were upheld but he was found to have
    erred in law in his findings on Article 3 and  8  in  relation  to  the
    medical evidence,  the  appellant's  mental  health  and  the  risk  of
    suicide.

 8. The case was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal  to  be
    re-heard in relation to the appellant's Article 3 and 8 medical claims.

 9. The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A M Black  on  17
    September 2019. The judge had before her two psychiatric reports from a
    consultant psychiatrist, Dr Robin Lawrence, the first dated 28 May 2015
    and the second, addendum report dated 28 January 2018. The  judge  gave
    significant evidential weight to the first report as to the appellant's
    condition and prognosis in 2015, but had concerns about the reliability
    of the second report from January 2018 for various  reasons  which  she
    set out in her decision. The judge concluded that the appellant's  risk
    of suicide was low and that the evidence was not sufficient  to  engage
    Article 3 insofar as his mental health and  the  risk  of  suicide  was
    concerned. As for Article 8, the judge concluded that the evidence  did
    not demonstrate that there would be very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration in Sri Lanka  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)  of  the  immigration  rules  and  that  it  would   not   be
    unjustifiably harsh or disproportionate for him to be  removed  to  Sri
    Lanka.

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to factor into her conclusions  the  appellant's  subjective
    fear and that that affected the weight she placed on the second  report
    from Dr Lawrence and her assessment of the risk of suicide, as well her
    findings on Article 8.

11. Permission was refused in the First-tier Tribunal, but was granted upon
    a renewed application by the Upper Tribunal on 20 December 2019.

Appeal hearing and submissions

12. Mr Martin referred to the background  evidence  which  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge including news articles  about  the  backlash
    against, and terrorising of, Muslims in Sri Lanka  and  submitted  that
    that all fed into the appellant's fear of how he would  be  treated  on
    return to that country, despite him not being a practising Muslim,  for
    the purposes of the Article 3 assessment. Mr Martin also referred to Dr
    Lawrence's reports and submitted that the judge  was  wrong  to  accord
    little or no weight to the second report  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    grounded in the appellant's evidence, given that the  consultant  would
    be accustomed to dealing with persons  with  irrational  beliefs  which
    were not based  upon  reality  and  would  be  used  to  conducting  an
    assessment upon his own impressions of the  person.  Therefore,  whilst
    the judge was entitled to treat the report with caution,  she  was  not
    entitled to accord it no weight, given that it would have been  founded
    partly upon the consultant's view of the appellant's appearance and his
    depressed state arising from his subjective fear. That  also  fed  into
    the assessment of the risk of suicide which also  ought  to  have  been
    undertaken with the appellant's subjective  fear  in  mind.  The  judge
    therefore erred by failing to put enough emphasis  on  the  appellant's
    thinking and his subjective fear. Mr  Martin  submitted  further,  with
    regard to Article 8,  that  whilst  he  accepted  that  the  judge  had
    adequately dealt with paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), the previously mentioned
    factors were relevant to  the  assessment  of  Article  8  outside  the
    immigration  rules.  That  was  a  broader  assessment   and   included
    considerations such as the appellant's relationship in the UK  and  his
    lack of familiarity with Sri Lanka as it now was.

13. Mr Whitwell submitted that the reliance upon the  news  articles  about
    the problems for Muslims in Sri Lanka and the appellant's  response  to
    that, was tenuous. The articles simply formed  the  background  to  the
    situation in Sri Lanka and were not relevant to the judge's  Article  3
    assessment in relation to the appellant's  mental  health.  As  for  Dr
    Lawrence's second report, the judge fairly assessed the report and  set
    out relevant concerns at [28], which  arose  not  only  from  it  being
    grounded on the appellant's account but  also  for  other  reasons.  Mr
    Whitwell submitted that, contrary to the assertions made in relation to
    the appellant's subjective fear, that was a matter  considered  by  the
    judge at [44]. The judge had not erred in law.

14. Mr Martin reiterated the points previously made in response.

Discussion and conclusions

15. It is the appellant's case, as expressed in the grounds and Mr Martin's
    submissions, that Judge Black failed to have regard to the  appellant's
    subjective belief of the risks he would face on return to Sri Lanka  in
    her assessment of the risk of suicide and the weight she accorded to Dr
    Lawrence's second report. Mr Martin submitted that the judge was  wrong
    to accord no weight to the second report  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    founded on incorrect premises, when Dr Lawrence would, as a  consultant
    psychiatrist accustomed to dealing with people with irrational beliefs,
    have looked beyond the appellant's perception of the risks he faced  in
    Sri Lanka and would have assessed his mental health  and  the  risk  of
    suicide on the basis of his subjectively held beliefs.

16. I cannot agree with this submission, however, as it seems  to  me  that
    the judge's assessment of the evidence  was  unassailable  and  plainly
    took account of the appellant's subjectively held beliefs. It is  clear
    that the judge was perfectly aware that  the  appellant's  case  relied
    upon such an argument, as she recorded Mr Martin's submissions and  the
    grounds of appeal in that respect at [6(c)], referring at [6(e)] to the
    appellant's case that he would not feel safe in Sri Lanka and at [6(i)]
    to the appellant's fear of discrimination and attacks  because  of  his
    religion, based upon the  general  situation  for  Muslims.  The  judge
    specifically addressed those matters at [42] and [44], focussing on the
    appellant's subjectively held beliefs.

17. Plainly that was the basis upon which the judge approached the  medical
    evidence, and specifically Dr Lawrence's reports. I do not  agree  with
    Mr Martin that the judge ought to have put aside the false premise upon
    which the second report was based and ought simply to have given weight
    to Dr Lawrence's conclusions in the light of his overall impression  of
    the appellant, including his appearance and presentation.  Clearly  the
    overall impression reached by Dr Lawrence would  have  been  materially
    influenced by  the  information  provided  by  the  appellant  and  the
    appellant's reaction to the imparting of that information. This was not
    a matter of inconsistencies in the appellant's account which  could  be
    attributed to mental health concerns, but went beyond  that,  referring
    to specific reasons for the appellant's condition which were simply not
    based upon the appellant's case and concluding that his condition would
    be exacerbated by the lack of support in  Sri  Lanka,  when  the  judge
    found that there would in fact  be  a  source  of  support.  The  judge
    detailed numerous examples, at [28], of where Dr Lawrence's conclusions
    were  based  upon  inaccurate  information  about  the  cause  of   the
    appellant's condition and the judge was perfectly entitled to  conclude
    that the weight to be given to the report was significantly  undermined
    as a result. It is not the case, in any event, that the judge  accorded
    the report no weight, but  she  accepted  the  diagnosis  given  by  Dr
    Lawrence in so far as it accorded with his previous report  and  in  so
    far as it was not based upon the false premise which she  detailed.  It
    seems to me that she was perfectly entitled to accord the  weight  that
    she did to the report and that she was perfectly entitled  to  approach
    the appellant's mental health concerns and the question of the risk  of
    suicide on the basis that she did.

18. For all of these reasons it seems to me that the  judge's  approach  to
    the medical evidence, to the appellant's mental health condition and to
    the risk of suicide was based upon a full and  complete  assessment  of
    his circumstances including the appellant's subjective fear  of  return
    in the context of the general background situation in Sri Lanka as well
    as his own circumstances on return. The  judge's  assessment  was  made
    with reference to  the  relevant  caselaw  and  applying  the  relevant
    principles and guidance and her conclusion, that the evidence  did  not
    demonstrate that there was a risk of suicide or of treatment  amounting
    to a breach of Article 3 was one which was fully and properly  open  to
    her.

19. With regard to Article 8, Mr Martin accepted that the judge  adequately
    dealt with paragraph 276ADE(1). His submission was that the  judge  did
    not, however, consider  all  the  various  factors  which  cumulatively
    amounted to a breach of Article 8 outside the  rules.  I  cannot  agree
    with that submission. The judge's Article 8 assessment was  a  detailed
    and thorough one, taking account of all relevant matters, including the
    appellant's mental health condition and the conclusions of Dr  Lawrence
    in his 2015 report in that regard, the appellant's fear of returning to
    Sri Lanka as a Muslim and the country reports of backlashes against the
    Muslim community, the appellant's ties to the UK  and  Sri  Lanka,  his
    length of residence in the UK and his relationship with his  girlfriend
    and her child. Clearly the judge's assessment outside the rules was not
    taken in isolation of her previously detailed findings in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1) at [38] to [50], which included specific references
    to  the  appellant's  subjective  beliefs  and   fears.   The   judge's
    conclusion, that it would not be unjustifiably harsh for the  appellant
    to be removed and that his removal  would  not  breach  his  Article  8
    rights, was accordingly one which took account of all relevant matters,
    was based upon a careful assessment of the  appellant's  circumstances,
    and was one which was fully and properly  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before her.  The judge  was  fully  entitled  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on the basis that she did. She did not make any errors of law in
    doing so.



DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

  Anonymity

  The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13 of the Tribunal
  Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
  2014.  I continue that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
  Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:  18 February 2020

