
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12939/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2019                              |On 04 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                               Md kamrul islam
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sharma of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born on 2  May  1969.
    He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 28  September  2018
    refusing him  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by Judge  Beg  (the  judge)  in  a
    decision promulgated on 9 January 2019.  The judge  did  not  find  the
    appellant to be a credible witness.  She found he would not be at  risk
    on return and as regards Article 8, that the respondent's decision  was
    proportionate.

 3. The grounds claim that the judge erred because she misdirected  herself
    with regard to various issues:

      a) The  judge  found  there  were  inconsistencies  where  there  were
         arguably none at [29] and [30] of the decision  with  regard  to  a
         newspaper article and hospital discharge report.

      b) At [32] the judge doubted  the  appellant's  account  at  screening
         because he said it was only Mr Choudhury  who  came  to  his  house
         threatening his parents whereas at  the  substantive  interview  he
         said it was 40 or 50 people who  came  with  others.   The  grounds
         claim the screening interview was brief.   The  appellant  was  not
         asked to state everyone's name.

      c) As regards [33] and [34], the judge did not  consider  the  medical
         evidence confirming the appellant's father's hearing problem.

 4. Further, the grounds claim the judge erred  in  casting  doubt  on  the
    appellant's  reasons  for  leaving  Bangladesh  in  1998  whereas   the
    appellant had given reasons at [15] and [34] of his statement  dated  7
    December 2018 which the judge did not consider.

 5. As regards [35]-[37]  of her decision the judge erred  in  saying  that
    the documents submitted were self-serving.  The grounds claim that  the
    appellant had given details of the  documentation.   In  particular  at
    [29] of his witness statement.

 6. At [38]  the  grounds  claim  the  judge  erred  because  she  said  no
    explanation was provided as to why the  criminal  case  documents  were
    served so late.  The judge erred because it was explained on  page  S39
    that the documents were only received on 28 November 2018 which  was  a
    clear indication as to why they were served late.  In  any  event,  the
    late service was not put to the appellant to explain.

 7. At [39]-[40] the judge criticised the appellant because  he  failed  to
    mention previously that any criminal cases had been lodged against  him
    or that he was the subject of an arrest warrant.  The grounds claim  it
    was raised at SCR.1  at  A5  of  the  respondent's  decision  that  the
    appellant feared the police which was a clear indication of a  criminal
    case or charge against him.  The grounds say that unless the  appellant
    was asked specifically at AIR or in cross-examination he was  not  able
    to explain that issue.

 8. In any event, the judge did not  make  any  clear  findings  about  the
    documents that the appellant submitted  with  regard  to  the  criminal
    case.

 9. It is claimed the judge erred at [45] in  finding  that  the  appellant
    could seek state protection.  That failed to  take  into  account  that
    state protection would not be available for a BNP politician.

10. In any event, the grounds claim that the judge accepted there was ample
    evidence in terms of sur place activities here for BNP-UK such that she
    erred in the adverse findings she made.

11. Judge L Murray granted permission to appeal on  5  February  2019.   He
    said inter alia as follows:

         "3.  It is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
             relation to dates finding  there  were  inconsistencies  where
             there arguably were  not  in  paragraphs  29  and  30  of  the
             decision in relation  to  a  newspaper  article  and  hospital
             discharge  report.   In  relation  to  the  former  the  judge
             concluded that the date of the incident was 20  December  1997
             whereas it was 21 December 1997 and in relation to the  latter
             noted that the  appellant  was  admitted  to  hospital  on  28
             January 1998 whereas the report  states  it  was  21  December
             1997.  It is also arguable that the judge erred in  concluding
             the documentation  was  self-serving  [paragraph  35]  without
             giving a reason (R (on the application of SS) v  SSHD  ("self-
             serving" statements) [2017]  UKUT  00164  (IAC)).   The  other
             grounds are less arguable but I do not refuse permission."

12. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

13. Mr Sharma summarised and clarified the grounds:

    Dates.  At  [29]-[30]  the  judge  made  adverse  credibility  findings
    regarding the attack in 1997 and the consequent admission and discharge
    from hospital in January 1998.  The appellant said  at  interview  Q69,
    asked when the attack took place, "It was 12 December 1997.  I think  I
    am slightly confused with the date.  It was towards the end of December
    some time."  In support of his claim to have been attacked, he produced
    a translated copy of the Daily Jalalabad dated 22 December  1997  which
    refers to an attack "yesterday" which would have been 21 December 1997,
    not 20 December 1997 which the judge mentioned.

14. At [30] the judge took issue with the discharge certificate.  The judge
    correctly said it was dated 28 January 1998 but incorrectly said he was
    admitted on the same date, whereas the discharge certificate said  that
    he was admitted  from  21  December  1997  to  28  January  1998.   The
    discharge certificate  was  consistent  with  the  evidence  the  judge
    recited at [20] that the appellant claimed to have been in hospital for
    five weeks.

15. At [40] the judge drew an adverse credibility finding  with  regard  to
    the appellant's supplementary bundle served on the day of  the  hearing
    because of the inconsistencies she thought  she  had  identified.   "In
    light of the inconsistencies in the  appellant's  various  accounts,  I
    attach very limited weight to the  documents.   I  find  that  all  the
    objective evidence on Bangladesh indicates that documents can be easily
    and fraudulently obtained."  Mr Sharma  submitted  that  all  documents
    including those in  the  supplementary  bundle  were  served  with  the
    appellant's claim except his witness statement.  The judge at [38] said
    the appellant had provided no explanation as to why  the  documents  in
    the supplementary bundle were provided so late  but  she  gave  him  no
    opportunity for an explanation.

16. As regards [35]-[37] of  the  decision,  the  judge  found  it  "highly
    questionable" why the appellant would publicise his name especially  as
    he was in the United Kingdom at that time.  Mr Sharma said  that  there
    was an explanation.  He drew my attention  to  [22]  and  [39]  of  the
    appellant's statement of 7 December 2018 which responded to [55] of the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter.  He said at [39]  that  the  decision-maker
    had failed to understand what he was trying to explain  at  Q141.   The
    point put by Mr Sharma was that there was  an  explanation  before  the
    judge which she did not consider.

    Sur Place.   The  judge  took  into  account  the  photographs  of  the
    appellant's attendance at meetings and demonstrations in the UK at [43]
    of her decision.  She found that he was an ordinary member who  had  no
    official role and had no profile either here  or  in  Bangladesh.   She
    found that taking the  appellant's  case  at  its  highest  he  was  an
    ordinary member of the BNP in Bangladesh before he came to  the  United
    Kingdom.  Mr Sharma submitted that if what the appellant said at  [41]-
    [43] at supplemental bundle  P20  was  correct,  bearing  in  mind  the
    inconsistencies he had identified in the judge's decision regarding the
    documentation, the appellant had a much higher profile.  Further, there
    was evidence at CO6 of the appellant's bundle that if the appellant was
    credible, he would be unable to avail himself of state protection.  See
    1.3.10-1.3.11.

17. Mr Tufan accepted the judge had made errors at [29]-[30] but said  they
    did not affect the judge's decision overall.  Put simply,  the  claimed
    incident happened in 1997 and the appellant had been  back  many  times
    since.  The judge's use of the phrase  "self-serving"  was  unfortunate
    but she was entitled to reach her decision that little weight could  be
    placed upon the documentation and in any event, there was  no  evidence
    it had been distributed.

Conclusion on Error of Law

18. There is no question that the judge erred in  what  she  said.  I  must
    consider whether such errors as I have identified, were material.

19. The core of the appellant's account and the foundation upon  which  his
    asylum claim is based is that he was an active member  of  the  BNP  in
    Bangladesh.  He said he was attacked by members of the Awami League  in
    December 1997.  The appellant claimed to be a vice president as well as
    being publicity secretary and joint secretary.  At Q4, he said he would
    give talks as a vice president.   At  Q65,  he  was  asked  whether  he
    encountered problems and at Q65 he responded,

         "Twice I was attacked in 1997.  I was attacked at my office.  I was
         attacked with a DA (machete like cutting  weapon).   I  was  struck
         with it to my head, my ear and my arm.  I was also  stabbed  at  my
         palm, my leg and my back."

20. At Q66, the appellant was asked  why  he  was  attacked  on  those  two
    occasions.  The judge set out the evidence at  [28]  of  her  decision.
    The appellant had said at Q66 that he was attacked once, not twice  and
    verbally abused in the  local  bizarre.   At  Q67,  he  said  that  the
    following day he was attacked in his office by Shirajul Choudhury, Azad
    Ali and Misba.  He said there were also another 40 people present.  The
    judge found the various accounts inconsistent and said that  they  cast
    doubt upon the credibility of the  appellant's  claim.   There  was  no
    challenge to the judge's findings at [28] nor was there  any  challenge
    to what the judge had to say at [39] mentioning an incident supposed to
    have taken place on 10 January 2018 at a time when the appellant was in
    the United Kingdom.  Mr Sharma's explanation which had not been put  to
    the judge was that the event had truly occurred but that there  was  an
    error with regard to the date.

21. Mr Sharma would have me accept that the  judge's  errors  infected  her
    decision overall.  The judge took against  the  appellant  because  the
    supplementary bundle was provided late such that the judge took  a  dim
    view of the evidence from the outset.

22. I find that whilst there were errors in the judge's decision, they were
    not material.  The judge found the very core of the appellant's account
    and the foundation of his claim to be incredible at [28].  It  is  true
    at [29] that the judge made a mistake  with  regard  to  the  date  the
    attack took place but that was not the only issue  that  troubled  her.
    The report she was asked to rely upon said that four BNP officials were
    assaulted, whereas the appellant's account at Q67 was that when he  was
    attacked by Choudhury, Ali and Misba they had another  40  people  with
    him and five to six people were injured with the appellant.  There  was
    no mention of four BNP officials being  assaulted.   The  inconsistency
    was put to the appellant at the hearing. The explanation was  that  the
    events took place a long time  ago  and  the  appellant  had  not  been
    inconsistent in saying that the events happened over a  period  of  two
    days but the judge at [28] had found the appellant's  various  accounts
    inconsistent and cast doubt upon the credibility of his claim.

23. Put simply, the errors on the part  of  the  judge  were  not  material
    because she did not find the foundation of the claim to  be  true.  The
    judge carried  out  a  careful  and  comprehensive  assessment  of  the
    evidence before her.  She  was  entitled  to  reach  her  findings  and
    decision, based upon the documentary evidence she  considered  and  the
    oral evidence at the hearing.

24. Whilst the judge made errors, they were not  material  to  her  adverse
    credibility findings.

25. The judge was obliged to take S.8 into  account.  Mr  Sharma  submitted
    that chronologically, the judge's findings with regard to S.8 came as a
    result of her decision and had therefore been infected by it. I find no
    infection.  I find the judge was entitled to bear in mind  in  her  S.8
    assessment that the appellant arrived here  originally  in  2003  as  a
    domestic worker and visited Bangladesh four times between 2010 and 2013
    returning here in 2013. He  was  arrested  in  February  2018  when  he
    finally made an asylum claim.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  his
    immigration history damaged his credibility in terms of S.8.

Notice of Decision

26. The judge's decision contains no material error of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

