

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/12442/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 November 2019                        |On 13 November 2019            |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     K K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Martin, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge McGrade dismissed the appellant's appeal by  a  determination
    promulgated on 4 February 2019.  The  appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal, specifying 7 grounds.  The FtT and the UT refused permission.

 2. The appellant petitioned the Court for  judicial  review  of  the  UT's
    refusal of permission.  In a joint minute, parties agreed that  the  UT
    erred by not granting permission on ground 2.  The  Vice  President  of
    the UT granted permission (not restricted to ground 2).

 3. The appellant's evidence was that he failed to  answer  a  question  at
    interview because he misunderstood a crucial word in the question.   At
    paragraph 21 of his determination, the judge rejected that  explanation
    because the appellant offered a detailed  answer  by  way  of  a  later
    amendment, which suggested that he had understood the question.

 4. Mr Govan conceded that the judge's reason was unsustainable.

 5. The word used in the  question  was  capable  of  being  understood  in
    different ways.  It might have been understood (or translated) one  way
    when first put, and the issue might have emerged only when  going  over
    the record.  To give a different answer later did not  imply  that  the
    appellant understood the question the  first  time  in  the  sense  the
    questioner intended.

 6. Mr Govan contended that grounds 1 and 3 -  7  were  only  disagreements
    with conclusions properly reached, and that as a whole the grounds  did
    not disclose such error as required the decision to be set aside.

 7. At paragraph 25, the judge finds it significant that the appellant  did
    not refer in the respondent's translation of the interview record or in
    his own translation to throwing the  Koran  to  the  floor  during  the
    alleged incident which led him to flee.  Ground 1  is  that  the  judge
    erred because the appellant did refer to throwing down the Koran.

 8. On reference to the underlying  materials,  and  to  the  rest  of  the
    appellant's evidence, he  has  referred  in  each  instance  either  to
    throwing down the  Koran,  or  to  his  actions  being  interpreted  or
    misrepresented to that effect.  Although Mr Govan argued that the judge
    took a view of the evidence which was within his lawful  scope,  in  my
    view adverse significance was erroneously attached to this matter.

 9. The rest of the grounds  are  all  of  lesser  force.   Some  are  only
    disagreements dressed up as "applying too high a  standard  of  proof",
    when the determination does not suggest that  the  judge  misunderstood
    that basic concept.  However, grounds 1 and 2 show error on points near
    the centre of the claim.  The other reasons in  the  determination  are
    not so powerful that it may safely stand after the excision required by
    those grounds.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  It  stands
    only as a record of what was said at the hearing.

11. There is a presumption that the UT will proceed to remake decisions, of
    which parties are reminded in  directions  issued  with  the  grant  of
    permission.  However, parties agreed that the nature  of  the  case  is
    such that it is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under
    Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to  the  FtT  for  an  entirely  fresh
    hearing.  The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are  not
    to include Judge McGrade.

12. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity is maintained at this stage.

      [pic]
      8 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
