
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12551/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th February 2018                        |On 1st March 2018             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     S N
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1989. He  arrived  in
       the UK in December 2011 as a Tier 4 general  student  migrant.   His
       leave was curtailed to expire on 30th April 2012. He made subsequent
       unsuccessful applications to remain as a Tier 4 student migrant, and
       an appeal was dismissed in December 2014, with his  becoming  appeal
       rights exhausted in May 2015. In July 2017 he was encountered by the
       Immigration Service and detained. He made an asylum claim  but  then
       withdrew it, and then remade another claim on 6th September 2017. He
       was interviewed on 17th October 2017 about his asylum claim, and the
       claim was refused on 22nd November  2017.  His  appeal  against  the
       decision refusing asylum was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       NMK Lawrence in a determination promulgated on the 2nd January 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Bird on 11th January 2018 on the basis that it was arguable that the
       First-tier judge had erred in law in refusing to adjourn the  appeal
       as the applicant had a cyst on his  left  eye  and  was  awaiting  a
       psychological report from Medical Justice, and produced evidence  of
       both of these things. It was arguable that  it  was  unfair  not  to
       adjourn the hearing until the appellant was fit and had evidence  to
       support his asylum claim.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.  There was an attempt by  the  appellant,
       who now acts in person, to adjourn this hearing due to health issues
       but that application was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on
       16th February 2018 on the basis that  the  issue  before  the  Upper
       Tribunal was primarily one of procedural fairness  relating  to  the
       Medical Justice report, and as this report  was  now  available  the
       Upper Tribunal would  be  able  to  assess  whether  unfairness  had
       resulted and in these circumstances an adjournment would not  be  in
       the appellant's best interests.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal contend that the appellant did not have a fair
       hearing before the First-tier Tribunal as his mental  health  was  a
       major factor in his case and that Tribunal had failed to adjourn the
       hearing  to  await  the  Medical  Justice  report  which  had   been
       commission, and in addition it was not fair not to  adjourn  due  to
       his eye cyst. The appellant, who made his submissions to me  through
       a court interpreter, put forward further evidence from his GP  which
       concludes that he was not fit to go through  a  hearing  before  the
       Upper Tribunal due to the lack of sleep and pain he is  experiencing
       from the swelling above his left eye brow and the distressing effect
       on his vision. I explained that I felt  that  it  was  in  his  best
       interests to deal with the legal issue of whether there had  been  a
       breach of procedural fairness today, and assured him  he  would  not
       have to provide any evidence. I  appreciated  he  was  a  vulnerable
       witness due to his psychological and physical ill-health.

    5. There was no Rule 24 notice. However, Mr  Lindsay  made  submissions
       that although there was an error in the test applied by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal with respect to whether the adjourn the  decision  not
       to adjourn was lawful as at that point the  appellant  had  a  legal
       representative who should have explained to the First-tier  Tribunal
       why it had not been possible to obtain a medical report in time  for
       the hearing, or simply obtained that report in time. Mr Lindsay also
       argued that it was wrong for the  appellant  to  have  produced  the
       report with this application for permission to appeal  as  this  was
       not evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

    6. I informed the parties that I found that the First-tier Tribunal had
       erred in law and that this error was material for  the  reasons  set
       out below. It was also relevant to review the report to consider the
       appropriate way forward with  the  appeal  having  established  that
       there was a material error in law.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. The basis on which the application for an  adjournment  was  refused
       was undoubtedly  unlawful.  At  paragraph  5  of  the  decision  the
       adjournment is prepared because the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found
       he "could not grant the  adjournment"  because  hearings  cannot  be
       adjourned without a firm appointment date  for  the  assessment,  in
       this case by Medical Justice. This position is said to be  justified
       by the overriding objectives.

    8. In fact the Presidential Guidance for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
       Adjournments reads as follows:

           Adjournments


           6.    Rule 4(3) gives the power to adjourn or postpone a
           hearing. This power must be exercised in accordance with the
           overriding objective and having regard to any other relevant
           considerations. The decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe
           (adjournment; fairness)[2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) emphasises the
           importance of the test of fairness and the question of whether a
           party will be deprived of a fair hearing if an adjournment is
           refused.


           7.    Each application to adjourn must be considered on its own
           merits, examining all the factors brought to the Tribunal's
           attention. When reaching a decision on such an application, the
           Tribunal may also have regard to information already held and
           its own special expertise (see rule 2(2)(d)).


           8.    Factors weighing in favour of adjourning an appeal, even
           at a late stage in proceedings, include.


                (a)    Sudden illness or other compelling reason preventing
                a party or a witness attending a hearing. Normally such a
                reason should be supported by medical or other relevant
                evidence, unless there has been insufficient time to obtain
                such evidence. However, where there is no likelihood that
                the party will be able to attend a hearing within a
                reasonable period, a hearing may proceed in absence where
                the tribunal considers that this is in the interests of
                justice in terms of rule 28.


                (b)    Late changes to the grounds of appeal or the reasons
                for refusal which change the nature of the case. The terms
                of rules 19(7),23(2)(b) and 24(2) should be taken into
                account, as appropriate, when considering changes to the
                grounds or reasons.


                (c)    Where further time is needed because of a delay in
                obtaining evidence which is outside the party's control, for
                example, where an expert witness fails to provide a report
                within the period expected.


           9.    The following factors, where relevant, may weigh against
           the granting of an adjournment.


                (a)    The application to adjourn is not made at the
                earliest opportunity.


                (b)    The application is speculative, such as, for example,
                a request for time for lodging further evidence where there
                is no reasonable basis to presume that such evidence exists
                or could be produced within a reasonable period.


                (c)    The application does not show that anything material
                would be achieved by the delay, for example, where an
                appellant wants more time to instruct a legal representative
                but there is no evidence that funds or legal aid is
                available.


                (d)    The application does not explain how the reason for
                seeking an adjournment is material to the case, for example,
                where there is a desire to seek further evidence but this
                evidence does not appear to be material to the issues to be
                decided.


                (e)    The application seeks more time to prepare the appeal
                when adequate time has already been given. In such
                circumstances, the Tribunal may take into consideration a
                failure to comply with directions. However, a failure to
                comply with directions will not be sufficient of itself to
                refuse an adjournment.


    9. It follows that needing more time to obtain an expert  report  is  a
       proper basis to grant an adjournment even at a late stage,  and  the
       question to be asked was would it deprive the appellant  of  a  fair
       hearing to refuse the adjournment. The  First-tier  Tribunal  should
       have asked itself on the one hand  whether  the  evidence  could  be
       material and on the other whether its  production  was  speculative.
       Clearly it was not speculative as  Medical  Justice  had  agreed  to
       provide an independent medico-legal report,  as  set  you  in  their
       letter of 11th December 2017, and had agreed to do this as  soon  as
       possible. That letter confirmed that there was a Rule 35  report  on
       the appellant which had also set out mental health problems.

   10. The report had clear potential relevance to the determination of the
       appeal as the appellant argues that he is a real risk of persecution
       if returned to Pakistan as he is a gay man, and evidence  of  mental
       health problems  could  explain  delay  in  claiming  asylum  and  a
       physical examination of  scars  could  have  provided  corroborative
       evidence of his history of abuse. The appellant also argues that  he
       would have very significant obstacles to integration and is entitled
       to remain on Article 8 ECHR private life  grounds  by  reference  to
       paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, and again  mental  health
       problems would have potential relevance to any such argument.

   11. The refusal of the adjournment was therefore an error of law  as  it
       was materially procedurally unfair.

   12. The report of Dr V Lilford of Medical Justice is now available. This
       report concludes, in short summary, that the claimant has asthma and
       a cyst above his left eye which requires urgent assessment  and  for
       which  he  has  been  referred  for  further  investigation.  It  is
       important that this happens as it could be a causing  him  pain  and
       distress, and possible dizziness. In terms of his mental  state  the
       applicant suffers from moderate  depression  and  anxiety,  and  had
       suicidal thoughts but had no intention to  self-harm.  The  lack  of
       scars from the ill-treatment the appellant says he was subjected  to
       by his family is found  to  be  consistent  with  the  ill-treatment
       described. It is considered whether the appellant  is  feigning  his
       psychological symptoms but Dr Lilford is  satisfied,  with  reasons,
       that this is not the case. I find that this report will be  material
       to the assessment of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  asylum
       claim.

   13. In light of the finding of legal error in  the  form  of  procedural
       unfairness which was material to  the  appeal  and  of  the  further
       psychological evidence requiring considerations in the round  I  set
       aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no  findings
       preserved and remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
       remaking.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal.

   3. I remit the remaking of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal with  no
      findings preserved.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.




Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   27th  February
2018
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsey
