
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12493/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 April 2021 via Skype for       |On 7 June 2021                       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JG (aka RM)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Fisher, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co. Solicitors


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were  primarily  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal, the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal,  and  the
parties' written submissions, the contents of which I have recorded.
The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly in their remote form.

 1. This is an appeal of the Secretary of State. For  convenience,  I  will
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal  where
    appropriate.

 2. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal promulgated on 30 November 2020 allowing  an
    appeal by the appellant, a person claiming to be a citizen  of  Somalia
    born on 18 February 1975, against a decision of the Secretary of  State
    dated 6 December 2019 to  refuse  his  fresh  claim  for  asylum.   The
    appellant's fresh claim was made on the basis of his claimed membership
    of the Bajuni people in Somalia, a particular social group.

Factual background

 3. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  in  September  1998.  It  is
    common ground that he did so in the name of JG,  a  Tanzanian  citizen,
    bearing what appears to have been a genuine Tanzanian  passport  issued
    in that name. The appellant was granted leave to remain on a number  of
    occasions in that identity. In October 2005, he applied  for  leave  as
    the dependent spouse of a settled person, again in the identity of  JG.
    That application was refused and he did not pursue  an  appeal  against
    that refusal.

 4. In January 2009, the appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he  was
    RM, a Somali citizen of the Bajuni  clan.   The  Bajuni  inhabit  small
    islands off the coast of southern Somalia.  The appellant claimed  that
    he would face being persecuted on account of being  a  member  of  that
    particular social group. He claimed that the identity of  JG  had  been
    provided to him by those who facilitated his journey to  this  country,
    maintaining that he had claimed asylum in  his  true,  Somalian  Bajuni
    identity. His claim for asylum was refused and the  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal was dismissed before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    October 2010 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham.

 5. In 2014, the appellant made a fresh human rights claim. It was refused,
    and the appellant's appeal against that refusal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Thorne in June 2014.

 6. On 26 August 2014, the appellant made further submissions in support of
    his asylum claim.  He also claimed to  have  been  trafficked  to  this
    country.  The further submissions were refused  in  circumstances  that
    did not attract a right of appeal.   The  National  Referral  Mechanism
    rejected his claim to have been trafficked on 26 September 2014.

 7. On 9 January 2015, the appellant made further submissions in support of
    his claim to be a member of the Bajuni clan.  The  further  submissions
    were refused as a fresh claim on 6  December  2019,  and  it  was  that
    refusal that was under appeal before Judge Hawden-Beal.

 8. The appellant enjoys limited leave to remain on the basis of his family
    and private life.  This appeal therefore concerns only  his  claim  for
    international protection.

The asylum claim

 9. The appellant's asylum claim commenced with an account  of  him  having
    been attacked by militia in 1991.  The militia killed  his  father  and
    later his mother.  His sister went missing.  He fled to Kenya where  he
    started a wholesale clothing business.  He was stabbed by his  business
    partner and looked to flee the country.  He later met a trafficker  who
    facilitated his travel  to  this  country  on  the  Tanzanian  passport
    provided to him for that purpose.  Upon arrival here, the appellant had
    to surrender his travel documents to the traffickers.   They  made  him
    work and took his money.  The traffickers tracked  the  appellant  down
    after he claimed asylum.  They bundled him into a car and  later  threw
    him out of the car onto a motorway.

10. The appellant subsequently provided a medico-legal report detailing  13
    lesions and scars which were said to be consistent with the history  he
    provided.  Some were consistent with a history of shackling,  and  that
    the overall pattern of scarring was highly consistent with a history of
    torture: see the report by Dr Ioana Steen dated 10 October 2014.

11. When initially refusing the appellant's claim to be  a  member  of  the
    Bajuni claim in 2010, the  Secretary  of  State  relied  on  a  Sprakab
    report, a form of linguistic analysis which is sometimes used to assist
    the  determination  of  claims  of  disputed  nationality  and  similar
    matters.  See the description at paragraph 3 and following of Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v MN  and  KY  [2014]  UKSC  30.   The
    linguists who drafted the report had listened  to  a  recording  of  an
    interview conducted with the appellant, and concluded that the  dialect
    of Swahili spoken by the appellant  was  found  in  Tanzania,  and  not
    Somalia.  The appellant had 'deficient' knowledge of Somalia, yet spoke
    Swahili with the fluent  intonation  and  pronunciation  typical  of  a
    variety of Swahili spoken in Tanzania.  He was not Somalian.

12. The appellant did not attend the hearing before Judge Graham  in  2010.
    It is clear from that decision that the judge scribed  significance  to
    the Sprakab report - see paragraph 30 - although noted at paragraph  32
    that the appellant had not been provided with  an  audio  copy  of  the
    recording, which he should have been.   The  judge  also  analysed  the
    contents of the appellant's asylum interview  and  witness  statements,
    finding the account provided by the appellant to lack credibility.  The
    appellant's 2014 fresh claim was  based  on  his  human  rights  claim,
    rather than a renewed protection claim.

13. In support of his fresh claim in 2015, the appellant relied on a report
    dated 11 May 2015 by Dr M. Faulkner, a  country  expert  based  at  the
    School of Oriental and African Studies.  Dr  Faulkner  interviewed  the
    appellant  and  considered  the  Sprakab  report,  concluding  that  it
    featured a number of weaknesses (see paragraph 20 and  following).   At
    paragraph 16 of the current refusal decision, the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that Dr Faulkner was an expert in  his  field,  but  noted  at
    paragraph 18 that he did not appear to have considered the 'the  appeal
    determination of 13th October 2012'  [sic].   That  must  have  been  a
    reference to Judge Graham's decision, promulgated on 27  October  2010,
    following a hearing on 13 October 2010.  There has not been a  decision
    dated 13 October 2012 in these proceedings.   Because Dr  Faulkner  had
    not considered Judge  Graham's  decision,  his  report  attracted  less
    weight, considered the Secretary of State.  The report did not  resolve
    Judge Graham's concerns about the  appellant's  lack  of  knowledge  of
    Somalia, and nor did it resolve the broader credibility  issues  raised
    by the judge in that decision.  The fresh claim was refused.

14. In the appeal below, the appellant relied on an addendum report from Dr
    Faulkner dated 10 March 2020, in which Dr Faulkner  sought  to  address
    the concerns raised by the Secretary of  State  in  her  decision.   He
    addressed the fact that Judge  Graham  did  not  have  the  benefit  of
    hearing evidence from the appellant, while  noting  that  much  of  the
    judgment was 'taken up with matters that are outside of my limited area
    of expertise' (paragraph 8).  The appellant had been  homeless  at  the
    time of the appeal and did not receive the notice of the  hearing.   Dr
    Faulkner scrutinised the Sprakab report,  and  addressed  a  number  of
    other concerns.  Part of the appellant's 2015 fresh  claim  had  relied
    upon a Somali birth certificate dated 20 November 1980.  The  Secretary
    of State had rejected the reliability of the document,  as  no  details
    had been provided as to its provenance.  Dr Faulkner said he was unable
    to authenticate the document, but observed that he found it odd that  a
    poor fisherman would have travelled to Mogadishu, the location  of  the
    issuing authority, to obtain the document.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

15. At paragraph 10, Judge Hawden-Beal said:

         "At the start of the hearing it was agreed by the parties that if I
         found the appellant to be of Bajuni ethnicity, it follows  that  he
         will be at risk of persecution as per paragraph 36  of  MOJ  &  Ors
         (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)."

16. The judge took as her starting point the findings made by Judge  Graham
    in 2010.  She noted that the appellant had been homeless at the time of
    that appeal, and so would not have received the notice of the  hearing.
    She heard the appellant  give  evidence  and  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had  not  been  trafficked  [39].   The  judge  compared  the
    different accounts provided by the appellant to the  respondent,  Judge
    Graham, and herself [43], and rejected much of what the  appellant  had
    said about his history [44].   At [45] she said that, although she  had
    rejected aspects of his credibility, 'that  will  not  make  a  jot  of
    difference if I find him to be a member of  the  minority  Bajuni  clan
    from  Somalia.'   She  analysed  the  Sprakab  report,  Judge  Graham's
    findings, and the two Faulkner reports.  Having outlined  the  contents
    and analysis of the Faulkner reports, she highlighted his  observations
    that it was unusual  for  a  poor  fisherman  to  have  had  his  birth
    registered in Mogadishu [53].  The judge noted that the only reason the
    Secretary of State placed  less  weight  on  the  Faulkner  report  was
    because it had been drafted  without  the  benefit  of  Judge  Graham's
    decision.  The judge  now  had  Dr  Faulkner's  addendum  report  which
    considered that judgment.  At [57] she explained why she preferred  the
    Faulkner reports to  the  Sprakab  report,  noting  at  [58]  that  the
    Faulkner reports post-dated Judge Graham's judgment.  The judge reached
    her operative conclusions at [59]; the appellant's  account  of  events
    prior to 1998 had by 'by and large' been consistent.  The appellant had
    been claiming to be of Bajuni ethnicity since 2009.   Dr  Faulkner  was
    acknowledged by the Secretary of State to be an  expert  [60];  he  had
    engaged with Judge Graham's findings.  The judge accepted the appellant
    to be of the Bajuni ethnicity and allowed the  appeal,  the  presenting
    officer having conceded that that was all that was  necessary  for  the
    appeal to be allowed: see [10] of her decision, quoted at paragraph 15,
    above.

Grounds of appeal

17. The Secretary of State appeals on two grounds.

18. First, that she failed to give adequate reasons on a  material  matter.
    The grounds contend that the judge failed to deal  with  the  fact  the
    appellant's Tanzanian passport had  previously  been  accepted  by  the
    Tanzanian authorities as evidence of his identity. It was an  error  to
    prefer the reports of Dr Faulkner over  the  Sprakab  report,  and  the
    judge failed to give adequate  reasons  for  preferring  one  over  the
    other.

19. Secondly, the judge failed to resolve  a  material  conflict  of  fact,
    namely the irregularity of the appellant's birth having been registered
    in Mogadishu.

20. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin sitting
    as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

21. The appellant provided a rule 24 response to the Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal, dated 9 February 2021.  Mr Tufan provided a skeleton
    argument on behalf of the Secretary of State,  also  dated  9  February
    2021.  The appellant responded to the  Secretary  of  State's  skeleton
    argument in a further skeleton argument,  which  was  undated  but  was
    received on 29 April 2021.

22. The Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal  seek  to  challenge  the
    judge's findings of fact.  It is necessary to recall that an appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal lies only on an error of law, not a disagreement  of
    fact.

23. Certain findings of fact are capable of being infected by an  error  of
    law, as notably summarised in R (Iran) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [9].  There are  many  judgments
    of the higher courts which underline the distinction between errors  of
    fact and law, and the need  for  appellate  restraint  when  addressing
    findings of fact reached by a judge below.  I can  do  no  better  than
    rely on the oft-quoted judgment of Lewison LJ in Fage UK Ltd v  Chobani
    UK Ltd [2014] EWCA Civ 5 at [114]:

         '114.  Appellate courts have  been  repeatedly  warned,  by  recent
         cases at the highest level, not to interfere with findings of  fact
         by trial judges, unless compelled to do so. This applies  not  only
         to findings of primary fact, but also to the  evaluation  of  those
         facts and to inferences to be drawn from them. The  best  known  of
         these cases are: Biogen Inc v Medeva Plc [1997] RPC 1; Piglowska  v
         Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR  1360;  Datec  Electronics  Holdings  Ltd  v
         United Parcels Service Ltd [2007] UKHL 23; [2007] 1 WLR 1325 ; Re B
         (A Child) (Care Proceedings) [2013] UKSC 33; [2013] 1 WLR 1911  and
         most recently and comprehensively McGraddie v McGraddie [2013] UKSC
         58; [2013] 1 WLR 2477. These are all decisions either of the  House
         of Lords or of the Supreme Court. The reasons for this approach are
         many. They include

             i.  The expertise of a trial  judge  is  in  determining  what
             facts are relevant to the legal issues to be decided, and what
             those facts are if they are disputed.

             ii.  The trial is not a dress rehearsal. It is the  first  and
             last night of the show.

             iii.  Duplication of the trial judge's role  on  appeal  is  a
             disproportionate use of the limited resources of an  appellate
             court, and will seldom lead  to  a  different  outcome  in  an
             individual case.

             iv.  In making his decisions the trial judge will have  regard
             to the whole of the sea of evidence presented to him,  whereas
             an appellate court will only be island hopping.

             v.  The atmosphere of the courtroom cannot, in any  event,  be
             recreated by reference to documents (including transcripts  of
             evidence).

             vi.  Thus even if it were possible to duplicate  the  role  of
             the trial judge, it cannot in practice be done.

         115.  It is also important to have in mind the role of  a  judgment
         given after trial. The primary function of a first  instance  judge
         is to find facts ` identify the crucial legal points and to advance
         reasons for deciding them in a particular way. He should  give  his
         reasons in sufficient detail to show the parties and, if  need  be,
         the Court of Appeal the principles on which he has  acted  and  the
         reasons that have led  him  to  his  decision.  They  need  not  be
         elaborate. There is no duty on a judge, in giving his  reasons,  to
         deal with every argument presented by counsel  in  support  of  his
         case. His function is to reach  conclusions  and  give  reasons  to
         support his view, not to spell out every matter as if summing up to
         a jury. Nor need he deal at any length with matters  that  are  not
         disputed. It is sufficient if what he says shows the basis on which
         he has acted. These are not controversial observations: see Customs
         and Excise Commissioners v A [2002] EWCA Civ  1039;  [2003]  2  WLR
         210; Bekoe v Broomes [2005] UKPC 39; Argos Ltd  v  Office  of  Fair
         Trading [2006] EWCA Civ 1318; [2006] UKCLR 1135.'

24. The judgment in Fage UK Ltd v Chobani UK Ltd is seven years old, but it
    continues to represent a useful summary of the law on the  approach  to
    findings of fact, and the deference owed  by  appellate  tribunals  and
    courts to first instance judges.  See the  Supreme  Court  in  Perry  v
    Raleys Solicitors [2019] UKSC 5 at [52] which summarised the principles
    on the 'constraints' on appellate courts and tribunals in these  terms.
    Lady Hale said the principles:

         'They may be summarised as requiring a conclusion either that there
         was no evidence to support a challenged finding of  fact,  or  that
         the trial judge's finding was one that no  reasonable  judge  could
         have reached.

25. More recently see the Court of Appeal in Lowe v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2021] EWCA Civ 62 at [29] and KM  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA Civ 693 at [77].

26. Against that background, I turn to the  grounds  of  appeal.  Mr  Tufan
    highlights what he contends are a series of weaknesses in  the  reports
    of Dr Faulkner. In his 2015 report, Dr Faulkner acknowledges that he is
    not a trained linguist. He does  not  speak  Bajuni,  yet  proceeds  to
    analyse the appellant's proficiency in the language.  The  expert  does
    not deal adequately with the appellant's lack of knowledge  of  matters
    relating to the currency of Somalia, nor its spelling, nor other  basic
    facts which he  'brushes  off'.  The  judge  erroneously  accepted  the
    evidence of Dr Faulkner at face value,  rejecting  the  Sprakab  report
    without sufficient analysis.

27. I reject these submissions which amount to disagreements of fact rather
    than errors of law. The judge's decision was careful and  thorough.  It
    is entirely clear from reading the  judge's  decision  the  basis  upon
    which she accepted the appellant to be of Bajuni ethnicity.  She  noted
    that Dr Faulkner, who had the benefit of interviewing the appellant  on
    a face to face basis, observed that the appellant was able  to  provide
    some details concerning life as  a  Bajuni:  [47].   She  addressed  Dr
    Faulkner's expertise, and his consideration of  whether  the  appellant
    was feigning his knowledge of Bajuni culture, having acquired  it  from
    elsewhere: [48].  She noted what the appellant had been able to confirm
    to the expert about Somalia and his claimed culture,  at  [49],  before
    addressing weaknesses in the Sprakab report.  They  included  the  fact
    that one of the (unnamed) Sprakab analysts claimed to have worked at  a
    Bajuni refugee camp at a  time  when,  in  fact,  it  was  closed.   Dr
    Faulkner had spent time living with the Bajuni community at the  Kenyan
    border: [51].  The judge  then  addressed  the  basis  upon  which  the
    respondent had initially rejected the analysis of Dr  Faulkner,  namely
    that his first report had been drafted without sight of Judge  Graham's
    decision.  Responding to submissions made  by  the  presenting  officer
    before her which had expanded upon the  Secretary  of  State's  initial
    criticism of the report, the judge explained why she did  not  discount
    the report's reliability on account of the appellant having not been re-
    interviewed, or Dr Faulkner having not  considered  the  audio  of  the
    original recording.  The Secretary of State has  not  challenged  those
    specific reasons before me.

28. Judge Graham's decision had been reached without  the  benefit  of  the
    appellant giving evidence.  By contrast, not only did this  judge  have
    the benefit of the two Faulkner reports, she also had  the  benefit  of
    hearing the appellant give evidence, and be cross-examined before  her.
    Having conducted thorough analysis on that basis, the judge reached her
    global conclusions on the reliability of the Faulkner reports  at  [57]
    and following.  Put simply, she preferred the Faulkner reports  to  the
    Sprakab reports, when assessed to the lower standard, for  the  reasons
    she gave.  That is precisely what first instance judges are required to
    do; resolve conflicting evidence, and reach clear and decisive findings
    of fact. The judge has done just that in this case.

29. The impact of the Tanzanian passport on  the  judge's  findings  was  a
    question of weight.  It was not capable of dealing the killer  blow  to
    the appellant's case the Secretary of State  contends  it  should  have
    inflicted.  That a genuine passport issued in the name of JG  was  held
    by this appellant does not inexorably lead to the only conclusion  that
    the appellant was JG.  The 'JG' to whom the  passport  was  issued  may
    well have been a real person, and the passport may have  been  obtained
    in his name.  Or it may have been a  genuine  document  that  had  been
    obtained fraudulently.  That  reality  does  not  conclusively  address
    whether the appellant is JG or bind judge to find  that  the  appellant
    was JG, when assessing the appeal to the  lower  standard.   The  judge
    gave detailed reasons for accepting  Dr  Faulkner's  opinion  that  the
    appellant was of Bajuni ethnicity.  The role  of  the  passport  was  a
    question of weight.  Barring irrationality, questions of weight are for
    the trial judge.  Not all judges would have reached these findings, but
    in doing so this judge did not fall into error.

30. It is nothing to the point that the  judge  did  not  address  why  the
    appellant's birth certificate had been issued in  Mogadishu,  which  is
    some way from the coastal islands he claimed to be from.  An  appellate
    court should not assume too readily that a tribunal misdirected  itself
    just because every step in its reasoning is not set out: see R  (Jones)
    v First Tier Tribunal  and  Criminal  Injuries  Compensation  Authority
    [2013] UKSC 19  Putting to one side the fact that the document  itself,
    purportedly issued in 1980, would have been obtained by the appellant's
    parents  when  he  was  a  young  child  and  he  therefore  would  not
    necessarily  know  why  they  had  chosen  to  register  his  birth  in
    Mogadishu, the judge did acknowledge the weaknesses arising  from  that
    aspect of the appellant's account.  She  noted  that  Dr  Faulkner  had
    observed that it was unusual for a poor fisherman to travel that far to
    register the birth of his son. That was clearly a factor the judge took
    into account when reaching her decision, having clearly considered  the
    entirety of the evidence in the case.

31. It is trite law that judges do not need to address every submission  in
    detail. Indeed,  judges  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  frequently
    encouraged to avoid excessive  detail.  In  any  event,  the  operative
    reasons given by the judge for allowing the appeal related not  to  the
    appellant's birth certificate, but to the reasons given by Dr  Faulkner
    in his two reports, when scrutinised against the competing evidence  in
    the form of the Sprakab report. Had it been the  case  that  the  birth
    certificate assumed a central role in the judge's reasoning,  then  one
    may have expected to see further analysis. As  things  stand,  however,
    this aspect of the Secretary of State's analysis  amounts  to  no  more
    than "island hopping", against the background of the judge's survey  of
    the whole sea of evidence.

32. In any event, while Dr Faulkner  does  consider  it  unusual  that  the
    appellant's birth certificate was registered so far  away,  nothing  in
    his qualifications suggests that he has any  expertise  in  the  Somali
    birth registration system in  1980.  I  have  not  been  taken  to  any
    background materials relied upon by the Secretary of  State  addressing
    that issue either.  While, when  assessed  against  Western  standards,
    travelling so far to register a birth may seem unusual, there  were  no
    materials that were before the judge, or that are before this tribunal,
    demonstrating that no reasonable judge could have reached the  findings
    she reached when 'contaminated'  by  a  birth  certificate  purportedly
    issued in Mogadishu. There was simply no evidence to suggest  that  the
    practice in Somalia at  the  time  could  only  have  admitted  of  the
    conclusion that birth certificates would be registered in the locality.

33. Drawing this analysis together, therefore,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal amount to no more than a disagreement with  the  well
    reasoned and thorough findings of fact reached by the  judge.  Contrary
    to the Secretary of State's assertion that  insufficient  reasons  were
    given to reconcile conflicts in the evidence,  it  is  plain  from  the
    reasons given by the judge why she reached  the  conclusions  she  did.
    This is not a decision whether reader is left wondering why or on  what
    basis the judge resolved the case as she did. The grounds of appeal are
    without merit.

34. Before concluding, I should address a matter raised by Mr Tufan in  the
    skeleton argument submitted on 9 February 2021, but not raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

35. Mr Tufan's skeleton argument sought to apply to withdraw the concession
    recorded at [10] of the  judge's  decision  (quoted  at  paragraph  15,
    above), by reference to Carcabuk & Bla v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department (00/TH/01426).   The fourth  guideline  concerning  the
    role of an adjudicator upon a presenting officer  making  a  concession
    provides:

         "(4)  A  HOPO  [Home  Office  Presenting  Officer]  may  make   any
         concession before an adjudicator. If he does, the  adjudicator  may
         ask him to reconsider it if he believes it may be wrong to make it.
         But the adjudicator must always bear in mind that the appellant may
         have prepared his case on the basis of the concession and  so  must
         ensure, if he persuades the HOPO that he should not make  it,  that
         the appellant is not prejudiced. In reality, HOPOs should not  make
         concessions unless sure that they should be making them."

36. Mr Tufan submitted that the concession was plainly wrong and should not
    have been accepted by the judge.  Minority clans, including the Bajuni,
    are not automatically at risk in Somalia, he  submitted.   The  judge's
    reliance on paragraph  36  of  MOJ  was  misplaced,  he  submits;  that
    paragraph does not concern Bajuni clans, and, properly understood,  MOJ
    held that there  was  no  persecution  for  minority  clan  members  in
    Mogadishu.  That led to an erroneous approach to the  judge's  findings
    concerning risk on return, which, in any event, could not be  sustained
    for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.

37. Mr Tufan's attempt to withdraw the concession at the error of law stage
    amounts to an attempt to expand the grounds of appeal  upon  which  the
    Secretary of State enjoys permission to appeal.  The application  fails
    to engage with the fifth guideline in Carcabuk which states:

         "If a concession is made by a HOPO, it  must  be  accepted  by  the
         adjudicator."

38. The judge's Record of Proceedings clearly records the concession  being
    made, as I explained to the parties at the hearing, and Ms Fisher,  who
    appeared below, confirmed that the said discussion did take place,  and
    that the concession was made.

39. Putting to one side the fact that the Secretary of State does not enjoy
    permission to appeal on this basis, I do not consider that it would  be
    appropriate to permit the Secretary of State to withdraw the concession
    at this stage.  Carcabuk suggests that the judge was  bound  to  accept
    the concession.  It would be prejudicial to the appellant to permit the
    concession to be withdrawn.  In  light  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    concession, the appellant focussed his submissions  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the sole, and what was thought  to  be  determinative,
    issue of whether he was a member of the Bajuni.

40. By permitting the Secretary of State retrospectively  to  withdraw  the
    concession, the appellant would be exposed to prejudice in the form  of
    the unresolved question of whether, notwithstanding his  membership  of
    the particular social group, the Bajuni in Somalia, he would face being
    persecuted  in  Somalia.   By  virtue  of  the   concession,   he   had
    legitimately  not  addressed  that  question  before   the   First-tier
    Tribunal, relying on it to his detriment.  The Secretary of  State  did
    not raise this point in her grounds of appeal to this tribunal.  It was
    only when making supplementary written submissions in these proceedings
    that she chose to do so.  I decline to permit the Secretary of State to
    withdraw the concession she made in this  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of  State  conceded  that  membership  of  the
    Bajuni was sufficient, and, by accepting that concession, the judge did
    not fall into an error such that this tribunal will interfere.

Conclusion

41. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law such that it must be set aside.

42. I maintain the anonymity order already in force.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law such that it must be set aside.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Stephen H Smith                         Date 25 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
