
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12879/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd December 2018                          |On 17th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Khalaf [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Hillis made
following a hearing at Bradford on 15th January 2018.

The appellant claims to be a male citizen of Syria but the respondent
believed, and the judge found, that he was a citizen of Egypt.

The appellant sought permission to appeal against the judge's decision on
the grounds that he had relied on documents from the Municipal Council of
Tarhuna in Libya confirming his nationality as Syrian, together with a
report from Dr Cherstich authenticating the document and its contents, but
the judge had failed to take them into account in reaching his conclusions.

In the Rule 24 reply the respondent stated that he does not oppose the
application for permission to appeal and invited the Tribunal to determine
the appeal with a fresh oral continuance hearing to consider whether the
appellant is a national of Syria.  He submitted that the findings at
paragraphs 22 to 32 should remain, together with paragraph 33.

The appellant served a Rule 25 reply, arguing that there were no material
findings in the paragraphs referred to in the respondent's reply save for
paragraph 32, which related to the documents at issue.

Mr Tan, for the respondent, accepted that the task of the First-tier Judge
would be cleaner if the case were remitted de novo but relied on his Rule
24 response and somewhat half-heartedly maintained that some of the
findings could be preserved.

I disagree.  Most of the findings referred to in the reply are simply a
statement of the evidence.  Paragraph 32 is a finding in relation to the
sending of the document but, given that it is the assessment of the
document which is the central issue in this case, I consider that it would
be an unwarranted fetter on the next judge's assessment of its reliability
were any findings to be preserved in relation to it.

Accordingly, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard
by a judge other than Judge Hillis with no findings preserved.  His
decision is set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 10 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
