
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12763/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                              |On 9 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     ZSS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Shazia Bhatti, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
(Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  6  July  1996.   He
    appeals the decision of a First-tier Judge following  a  hearing  on  7
    December 2018 to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse his asylum claim on 7 August 2018.

2.   The First-tier Judge summarised the appellant's claim as follows:

         "6.  The appellant said that he lived in Kunduz, an area controlled
             by the Taliban.  His  late  father  was  a  commander  in  the
             Taliban.  He and A's brother  were  killed  fighting  for  the
             Taliban.  The Taliban were therefore  respectful  towards  him
             and his widowed mother.  They visited on a regular  basis  and
             gave them money.  They asked A to join them but did not  force
             him to do so.

         7.   One day in September or October 2014, (when  A  was  18  years
             old), the Taliban governor of  the  area  where  A  lived  was
             visiting  his  family  when  anti-Taliban  militia  (Arbakian)
             attacked A's village.  Therefore A fled with the Commander and
             stayed with the Taliban for safety.  The militia destroyed A's
             home.  After about 20 days, A's brother in law came to  get  A
             telling the Taliban that  A's  mother  (who  was  living  with
             friends) was missing him.  The Taliban let him go back to  see
             his mother, but only for a couple of days.

         8.   However, A decided not to return to the Taliban.  Instead  his
             brother in law arranged for an agent to take him  out  of  the
             country.  He travelled to Calais via Iran  and  Turkey.   This
             journey lasted about 2 years.  He then remained in Calais  for
             2 years before he arrived in the  UK  hidden  in  a  lorry  on
             23/01/18.  He claimed asylum on 09/02/18.

         9.   In his AI he said that he  feared  the  Taliban  because  they
             might  think  he  was  a  spy.   In  addition  he  feared  the
             authorities and his neighbours in  the  village  because  they
             might think he was a Taliban.  In his AIR  he  said  that  the
             Taliban had taken his brother in law and accused him 'that  he
             made me escape.'"

3.   The appellant gave evidence before the First-tier Judge.  He stated  he
    had never been to Kabul and knew no-one there.  His wife and brother-in-
    law lived in Kunduz province.  They had told him that  his  brother-in-
    law had been taken by the Taliban because of the  appellant.   When  he
    had lived in Afghanistan he had done agricultural work.  He was fit and
    well and educated and literate and had no family in the UK.

4.   The judge  had  the  benefit  of  an  expert  country  report  from  Dr
    Giustozzi which he summarised as follows:

         "a.  If A were to return to the Kunduz area he would in  likelihood
             be again the object of the  Taliban's  attention.   He  was  a
             member of a 'Taliban martyr family'

         b.   A will not be listed as a deserter.  'It is unlikely that  the
             Taliban will seek to punish [A] but they are likely to  resume
             recruitment efforts if they will be able to trace him.'

         c.   A 'could to a large extent  avoid  the  Taliban's  recruitment
             efforts if he relocated to a  city  under  government  control
             like Kabul.'  However the cost of living is high in Kabul  and
             he would risk destitution.

         d.   As a failed asylum seeker he is likely to  be  interviewed  by
             the authorities at the airport at Kabul.  If he destroyed  his
             passport  and  or  left  Afghanistan  illegally  he  will   be
             prosecuted.  The authorities might assume that he  worked  for
             the Taliban because of his family connections.

         e.   The Arbakai are a 'rather  unruly  armed  force  only  loosely
             controlled by the authorities.'  A might be at risk from  them
             if he returned to his home area."

5.   Having correctly addressed himself  on  the  law  and  Regulations  the
    judge referred to the country information  and  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00118.   Having   considered   all   the
    documentary evidence including the expert report  the  judge  concluded
    that he should follow the guidance set out in AS.

6.   The judge made the following credibility findings:

         "46. There is no dispute that A is a citizen of  Afghanistan.   For
             reasons given  below,  applying  the  low  standard  of  proof
             applicable in this case, I accept that A lived in  Kunduz,  an
             area controlled by the Taliban.  I also accept that  his  late
             father was a commander in the Taliban and that the father  and
             A's brother were killed fighting for the Taliban.  His account
             about this is plausible, has  remained  reasonably  consistent
             and accords with the general country information  (and  expert
             report) about the situation in A's home province.

         47.  I also accept that the Taliban were respectful towards  A  and
             his widowed mother because they were seen as a 'martyr family'
             and that the Taliban asked A to join them but  did  not  force
             him to do so.   His  account  about  this  is  plausible,  has
             remained reasonably consistent and accords  with  the  general
             country information (and expert report) about the behaviour of
             the Taliban in such circumstances.

         48.  Applying the requisite standard of proof I also accept that in
             September or October 2014, (when A was  18  years  old)  anti-
             Taliban militia (Arbakian) attacked  A's  village  and  A  was
             offered sanctuary by the Taliban Commander and stayed with the
             Taliban for about 20  days.   I  also  accept  that  when  A's
             brother in law came to get A  telling  the  Taliban  that  A's
             mother was missing him, the Taliban let him go back to see his
             mother.  His account about this is plausible and has  remained
             reasonably consistent.

         49.  For similar reasons I also accept  that  A's  brother  in  law
             arranged for an agent to take A out of the country and he made
             the long journey to the UK as he claims."

7.   The judge considered the risk on  return  firstly  in  the  appellant's
    home area where he did not accept that the appellant would be  at  risk
    from neighbours or the Arbakai militia.  The militia had  attacked  the
    whole village and not just his family home.  In addition they  knew  of
    the appellant's family's involvement with the  Taliban  and  had  never
    targeted him personally and would know that he  had  escaped  from  the
    Taliban and had left the country to avoid fighting with them.   It  was
    unlikely that the anti-Taliban militia would have an  adverse  interest
    in the appellant.  However the judge  did  accept  that  the  appellant
    might be at some risk in his home area from the  Taliban  now  as  they
    might feel aggrieved that he had failed to stay with them  and  instead
    abused their hospitality by running away.  There was a risk they  would
    now seek to recruit him if he returned to his home  area  or  otherwise
    punish him.

8.   The judge then considered the risk on return to Kabul and concluded  as
    follows:

         "55. However for reasons given below I conclude that  it  would  be
             reasonable to expect him to return and re-locate  to  live  in
             Kabul.  First, I do not consider that he would be at any  risk
             in Kabul from his  neighbours  or  the  Arbakai  militia.   As
             outlined above, I conclude that they have no adverse  interest
             in him anywhere.   Even  if  they  did,  there  is  inadequate
             evidence that they would have the motive or means to track him
             down in Kabul.  As the expert report makes clear, the  Arbakai
             are a 'rather unruly armed force only  loosely  controlled  by
             the authorities.'  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Arbakai
             militia operate in Kabul or have any links to persons there.

         56.  Secondly, I do not consider that he would be at  any  risk  in
             Kabul from the Taliban.  The A's expert opined that  A  'could
             to a large extent avoid the Taliban's recruitment  efforts  if
             he relocated to a city under government control like Kabul.'

         57.  I also take into account the guidance in AS (Safety of  Kabul)
             Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) that a person who is of
             lower-level interest  for  the  Taliban  (i.e.  not  a  senior
             government or security services official, or a spy) is not  at
             real risk  of  persecution  from  the  Taliban  in  Kabul.   I
             conclude that it has not been  established  that  the  Taliban
             consider A to be a  senior  government  or  security  services
             official, or a spy.

         58.  Moreover in her submissions to me, Ms Bhatti accepted that 'it
             is unlikely that the Taliban  will  pursue  him  in  Kabul'  I
             agree.  She contended that his risk was from  the  authorities
             in Kabul.

         59.  For reasons given below I do not accept that A is at  risk  of
             persecution from the authorities in Kabul.  First, A is not  a
             member of the Taliban and has never worked for them.  I do not
             accept that even if the authorities did make  enquiries  about
             him that they would be given information that he was a  member
             of the Taliban.  There is  inadequate  evidence  to  establish
             that the authorities in Kabul would want  to  or  be  able  to
             obtain information from A's neighbours in his home village  or
             the Arbakai militia who are  described  by  A's  expert  as  a
             'rather unruly armed force  only  loosely  controlled  by  the
             authorities.'

         60.  Even if the authorities did make contact with  these  persons,
             for reasons given above I conclude that they do  not  have  an
             adverse interest in him and are likely to tell the authorities
             what A says is the truth, i.e. that that he escaped  from  the
             Taliban and left the country to avoid fighting with them.

         61.  It may be that (as A's  expert  contends)  that  as  a  failed
             asylum seeker A might be interviewed by the authorities at the
             airport at Kabul and if he destroyed his passport and or  left
             Afghanistan illegally he will be prosecuted.  However, even if
             that might happen I conclude that it has not been  established
             that such a prosecution would be  based  on  a  law  which  is
             discriminatory or  is  being  disproportionately  applied  for
             Geneva  Convention  reasons.   Moreover  it   has   not   been
             established  that   such   a   prosecution   would   lead   to
             imprisonment.  Even if it did, I accept that findings  in  the
             Country   Information   and   Guidance   Afghanistan:   Prison
             conditions Version  1.0  September  2015  at  2.4.1  that  'In
             general  prison  conditions  in   Afghanistan   are   not   so
             systematically inhuman and degrading or life-threatening as to
             meet the threshold of Article 3 of the ECHR.'

         62.  In addition, A has spent so little time in the UK, I  conclude
             that he would not be perceived as  having  been  'westernised'
             and would not be at risk of persecution on that account.

         63.  I therefore conclude that A would be returning to Kabul  as  a
             young man who is not at risk of persecution in Kabul from  the
             authorities or the Taliban or anyone else.  He  said  in  oral
             evidence that  he  has  experience  of  agricultural  work  in
             Afghanistan  and  was  fit  and  well  and  was  educated  and
             literate.

         64.  In  those  circumstances,  fully  considering  the  particular
             characteristics of A and applying the reasoning in the case of
             AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC), I
             conclude that it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for
             a single adult male in good health (such as A) to relocate  to
             Kabul even if he does not have  any  specific  connections  or
             support network in Kabul."

    Accordingly the judge dismissed the appellant's protection  appeal  and
    noted that the appellant's representative had submitted there  were  no
    arguable grounds under Article 8 with which he agreed.

9.   There was an application for permission to appeal  and  permission  was
    granted on 22 March 2019 by the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  following
    point:

         "The appellant says the Judge failed to take into account that  the
         appellant said the local militia attacked with the national army in
         the interview and focused on the appellant saying in  interview  it
         was the Arbakiyan who attacked his home.  The appellant's  position
         was thus that he was at risk  anywhere  in  Afghanistan.   This  is
         arguable in light of the reply to question 35 of the interview."

10.  In question 35 the appellant had been asked "What do you fear in  AFG".
     The appellant had said "My father was with the Taliban, after  he  was
    killed Taliban keep coming to our home, once the Taliban  were  in  our
    home then Abarki, the local militia, attacked with the  national  army,
    attacked the village.  ..."

11.  At the hearing Miss Bhatti relied on the grounds.  She  submitted  that
    the judge had not taken into account the fact that  the  national  army
    was involved in the attack and this would pose a risk for the appellant
    in Kabul.  She referred to the expert report.

12.  Mr Kandola referred me to the witness statement made by  the  appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal which had clarified what he had said  at
    interview.  He had stated in paragraph 4 of the witness statement  that
    there was a lot of confusion when his house had been  attacked  and  in
    paragraph 6 of his statement he had said "In relation to  paragraph  35
    of the refusal letter, it was the Arbakiyan which is the  local  police
    who raided and destroyed my home".

13.  Mr Kandola submitted that there  had  been  no  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's approach.  In any event the judge had  been  entitled  to  find
    that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  of  persecution  from  the
    authorities in Kabul for the reasons he had given in  paragraph  59  of
    the decision.

14.  Miss Bhatti submitted  that  it  was  not  clear  when  the  judge  had
    referred to the authorities in  Kabul  what  was  meant.   Was  it  the
    militia army or the police?  She submitted that the judge's conclusions
    were not in  line  with  the  expert  report  who  had  stated  at  the
    conclusion of the report that the appellant would primarily be at  risk
    from the authorities.  The expert noted that arrests were often carried
    out on the basis of the slimmest of evidence.  It was not clear why the
    authorities should have no interest in the appellant.

15.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with  the  decision  if  there  was  a
    material error of law.

16.  In my  view  permission  to  appeal  and  indeed  the  application  for
    permission was based on a false premise as Mr Kandola points out.   The
    witness statement for the appellant made it clear what he had  intended
    to state in answer to question 35 at the interview - the house had been
    raided by the local police.  There had been confusion at  the  time  of
    the attack.  The judge's decision was properly based on the totality of
    the evidence including the appellant's witness statement. Further, I do
    not accept that there was any confusion in the judge's consideration of
    the risk on return to Kabul.  His findings of fact in relation  to  the
    appellant were correct.  Miss Bhatti had  submitted  to  the  judge  as
    recorded in paragraph 58 of the decision that the  risk  was  from  the
    authorities in Kabul and the judge had properly dealt  with  that  risk
    and had been fully alive to the points made by the expert which he  had
    set out in paragraph 19 of his decision.

17.  The judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  would  be
    returning to Kabul as a young man who was not at  risk  of  persecution
    from the authorities or the Taliban or indeed anyone else.

18.  I find no material error of law in the judge's  decision.   Accordingly
    the appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge  to
    dismiss the appeal on all grounds stands.

19.  It is appropriate to make an anonymity order in this case.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed   Date 3 May 2019

G Warr. Judge of the Upper Tribunal
