


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12965/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 10 May 2017                        |On 14 June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                               MR JOWEL AHMED
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr M Aslam of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a national  of  Bangladesh  born  on12  November  1989,
      appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge McIntosh dated 23 February 2017 to  refuse  his  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent dated 4 November 2016 to refuse
      to grant the appellant  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  in  the
      United Kingdom.


   2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on
      23 March 2017 stating that it was arguable that adequate reasons  were
      not given in the decision for why the appellant would not be  at  risk
      on return to Bangladesh as it was "acknowledged"  that  the  appellant
      was an atheist.



3. At the hearing, I heard submissions from both parties. On behalf  of  the
   respondent Mr Aslam submitted that it is clear from the decision which is
   very brief that adequate findings were not made. He said that no  attempt
   has been made to assess  the  appellant's  risk  of  harm  on  return  to
   Bangladesh. It is not clear whether the judge accepted that the appellant
   is a Muslim.  He  did  not  take  into  account  the  evidence  that  the
   appellant's father has threatened to report the appellant to the  police.
   The Judge has not applied the proper standard of proof.


4. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Whitwell relied on his rule  24  response
   and said that the grounds of appeal are 10 pages long. He stated that the
   grounds our predicated on the fact that the appellant is an atheist.  The
   Judge was aware of the context at paragraph 31 to 33 of his decision that
   the claim was that the appellant claims to be an atheist and is  at  risk
   on his return to Bangladesh  for  that  reason.  The  judge  referred  to
   background material submitted that atheist bloggers  have  been  attacked
   and killed in Bangladesh. He also referred to  an  article  in  Wikipedia
   that although according to the constitution of  Bangladesh,  citizens  of
   the  country  have  freedom  of  religion,   all   kinds   of   religious
   discrimination is illegal  but  religious  minorities  and  atheists  are
   conspicuously underrepresented by  the  government  and  society  in  the
   country.


5. In reply Mr Aslam submitted that at paragraph 10 the  Judge  had  applied
   too high a standard of proof when he stated in his decision at  paragraph
   10 that, "substantial grounds for believing" in  humanitarian  protection
   appeals must be demonstrated  when  it  should  have  been  a  reasonable
   likelihood standard of proof. He submitted that the decision  is  fatally
   flawed.


     Decision as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

6. I have given anxious scrutiny to  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge. He concluded that he did not find the appellant  credible
   or his claim credible and dismissed his appeal. The  appellant's  quarrel
   with the decision is that there was a  lack  of  adequate  reasoning  for
   rejecting the claim and that the Judge placed to high the burden of proof
   on the appellant and a lack  of  findings  on  relevant  evidence  placed
   before the Judge. Mr Aslam submitted that the  "substantial  grounds"  is
   not the correct standard of proof in humanitarian protection cases.


7. At paragraph 10 of the  decision,  the  Judge  set  out  the  burden  and
   standard of proof required for the appellant to succeed in his claim  for
   humanitarian protection. "The Judge stated  that  the  appellant  has  to
   prove that  there  are  "substantial  grounds"  for  believing  that  the
   appellant meets the requirements of the Qualification Regulations.


8. The standard of proof with regard to Humanitarian Protection, it  is  for
   the  appellant  to  establish  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that
   returning him will result in a real risk of him suffering serious harm as
   defined at paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules and thus  that  he  is
   entitled to Humanitarian Protection. It is in asylum cases the assessment
   of the appellant's  evidence  and  his  fears,  is  whether  there  is  a
   reasonable likelihood that he has established a real risk of persecution.


9. Therefore, the Judge set out the correct burden  and  standard  of  proof
   paragraph 10 of the decision.


10. The Judge stated at paragraph  43  of  his  decision  that  Home  Office
   presenting officer identified the issues in the appeal and accepted  that
   if the appellant can prove that he is an atheist, he will be at  risk  in
   Bangladesh. This demonstrates to me that the issue before the  Judge  was
   very clear and given the respondent's concession, the  only  question  in
   the appeal was whether the appellant is an atheist as claimed. The  Judge
   found the appellant's claim that  he  is  an  atheist  not  credible  and
   dismissed his appeal.


11. One of the Judge's reasons were based  on  the  appellant's  immigration
   history of the appellant. Which was that the appellant was granted  leave
   to remain as a student in 2009 with a valid student visa until 2012.  The
   appellant's leave was extended  until  2016  but  prior  to  this  on  17
   September 2015, his leave was curtailed. The appellant  appealed  against
   the decision curtailing his leave and on 5  January  2016  the  appellant
   received a pre-action protocol response, upholding  the  decision.  On  1
   March 2016, the appellant was given notification for his removal from the
   United Kingdom and on 27 April 2016, the appellant claimed asylum.


12. This demonstrated to the Judge that the appellant  only  claimed  asylum
   after removal notification was sent to him and was entitled to take  that
   against  the  appellant's  credibility  under  s8  of  the   Asylum   and
   Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, Etc.) Act 2004.


13. The appellant claims that he ceased Islamic  observations  of  attending
   the mosque and fasting and no longer considered  himself  a  Muslim  from
   November 2015 and told his family about his feelings and stated that  his
   attendance at the mosque had ceased six months  previous  to  his  asylum
   claim. The Judge therefore was entitled to find that  the  appellant  who
   had become aware as of November 2015 of  the  risks  he  faced  from  his
   family if returned to Bangladesh, did not claim asylum  until  2016.  The
   Judge was  therefore  entitled  to  take  this  against  the  appellant's
   credibility and the credibility of this claim.


14. The Judge  also properly advised himself  that  section  8  is  not  the
   starting point of his assessment of credibility but  a  factor  he  takes
   into account in his overall assessment and referred to  the  case  of  SM
   [2005] UKAIT 00116.


15. The Judge also did not find credible that while  the  appellant  claimed
   that he questioned the validity of Islam while he lived in Bangladesh  in
   2005/2006 but when he came to the United Kingdom in 2009, he continued to
   attend the local mosque even though there  was  no  pressure  on  him  to
   attend. The Judge was entitled to find not credible  that  the  appellant
   who claims he cannot return to Bangladesh as an atheist,  would  come  to
   this country and continue to attend mosque  and  continue  other  Islamic
   practices. The Judge found that this  goes  to  the  credibility  of  the
   appellant's claim that he has become an atheist. This was the sole  issue
   in the appeal which is whether the appellant is an atheist or not.


16.  The quarrel with the Judge is that he did not  give  many  reasons  for
   finding that the appellant is not an atheist. There do not always have to
   be many reasons given for the Judge to make a sustainable finding on  the
   evidence. In this case the Judge gave sufficient  valid  and  sustainable
   reasons for not finding appellant credible or his claim credible.


17. Given that the Judge found that the appellant  is  not  an  atheist  for
   valid reasons he found that the appellant does not  have  any  desire  to
   publicly preach about his lack of belief of Islam. The Judge at paragraph
   41 stated "I am not convinced  that  the  appellant  has  any  particular
   desire to publicly preach about his lack of belief in  Islam  or  in  any
   other religious belief." This is a clear misdirection as to the  standard
   of proof because the Judge does not need to  be  convinced  of  anything.
   However, in the context of this  decision,  I  find  that  it  is  not  a
   material error which infected his findings that the appellant is  not  an
   atheist. It follows that if the appellant is not an  atheist,  inevitably
   he would not preach atheism, if returned to Bangladesh.  On  the  correct
   standard of proof, the Judge would have found the same.


18. The Judge  questioned  why  the  appellant  would  tell  his  family  in
   Bangladesh after 2014 that he is an atheist and  that  he  is  no  longer
   attending the mosque or fasting. This date coincides with the appellant's
   leave to remain being cancelled. The Judge was entitled to find that when
   the appellant had no leave to remain in the United Kingdom, he decided to
   tell his family about his purported atheism even though he claims that he
   was aware of it since 2005/2006. The Judge found that the appellant  must
   have known that by telling his family in Bangladesh, he would not be able
   to go back to that country, which was a way of achieving  his  objectives
   of not returning to Bangladesh. I find that the inference is  inescapable
   that the appellant asylum claimed asylum to frustrate removal.


19. The Judge made an error when he stated that there is  "no  corroborative
   evidence," of the appellant speaking about  atheism  to  his  family  and
   close friends. I read the Judge as saying that the appellant  could  have
   brought evidence from one of his friends to say that he has told them  he
   is an atheist. The Judge is entitled to find that the  appellant  by  not
   providing evidence which would have  been  relatively  easy  for  him  to
   obtain, the absence of some  easily  obtainable  evidence,  goes  to  his
   credibility.  I find that it is not  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
   context that the Judge used it.


20. The Judge notes at paragraph 38 that his father said he will report  him
   to the police if he returns to Bangladesh. The Judge was entitled not  to
   believe this evidence that the appellant would be arrested on his  return
   to Bangladesh. The Judge  considered  it  and  gave  cogent  reasons  for
   rejecting it.


21.  Similarly,  the  Judge  he  was  entitled  not  to  believe  that   the
   appellant's claim that he was thinking of starting a blog about  atheism.
   This indicated to the Judge that the appellant  is  attempting  to  mould
   this case around existing background  that  atheist  bloggers  have  been
   arrested in Bangladesh, and not the other way around.  If  the  appellant
   wanted to write a blog and given that he became disenchanted  with  Islam
   in 2005/2006, no credible reason was advanced by the appellant for why he
   has not done so earlier given that he has  been  in  this  country  since
   August 2009.


22. The question I now must ask myself is whether  these  reasons  given  by
   the Judge were sufficient to dismiss the appellant's claim. The Judge was
   entitled to find that the appellant was not an atheist  or  that  he  was
   genuinely in fear of returning to Bangladesh for that or any other reason
   whatsoever.


23. I find from the reasoning of the Judge for  dismissing  the  appellant's
   appeal is unassailable. I find that no differently  constituted  Tribunal
   would reach a different conclusion, on the evidence in this appeal.


24. I find that no error of law  has  been  established  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal decision.  I accordingly uphold that determination I dismiss the
   appellant's appeal.


   Decision

I            dismiss            the            appellant's            appeal


                                            Dated this 12th day of June 2017
Signed by,

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Mrs S Chana




