
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12364/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 April 2019                     |On 17 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


                                   Between

                                    [P B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                             NOTICE OF DECISION

1.     The  appellant  appealed  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse   a
    protection claim. The decision dated 21 August  2018  only  dealt  with
    protection issues and did not make a decision in relation  to  a  human
    rights claim with reference to Article 8 of  the  European  Convention.
    However, the appellant was granted leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds for 30 months in a subsequent decision dated 24 August 2018.

2.    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the  ground  that
    removal would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
    Convention and would amount to a breach of the appellant's rights under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 31 January 2019. The appellant was refused
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision made on
    Refugee Convention grounds but granted permission in  relation  to  the
    last ground, which asserted that the judge  wrongly  determined  issues
    relating to Article 8 and erred in purporting to dismiss the appeal  on
    this basis when the point was not an issue in the appeal.

4.    The appellant corresponded with the Upper Tribunal and the  respondent
    in order to explore whether the  appeal  could  be  determined  on  the
    papers. In correspondence dated 29 March  2019  the  respondent  agreed
    that the appellant had already been granted leave to remain on  Article
    8 grounds and that it was understood that Article 8 was not raised as a
    ground of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The respondent  agreed
    to the disposal of this appeal in the way suggested by the appellant in
    her correspondence dated 25 March 2019.

Decision and reasons

5.    I am satisfied that there is evidence to show that both parties  agree
    that this appeal can be disposed of without the need for a  hearing  in
    the Upper Tribunal. It seems clear that there was no appeal before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on Article 8 grounds and that the  judge  erred  in
    purporting to determine an appeal on that basis. The appeal was brought
    solely against a decision to refuse a protection claim.

6.    I am satisfied that the section of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    making findings on Article 8 should be set aside [35-40] because  there
    was no appeal with reference to Article 8 of  the  European  Convention
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

7.    The remaining findings dismissing the  appeal  on  Refugee  Convention
    grounds and human rights grounds (Articles 2 and 3) shall stand.

8.    The hearing listed on 10 May 2019 will be vacated.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

That part of the decision which makes findings on Article 8 is set aside

The First-tier Tribunal findings relating  to  the  Refugee  Convention  and
human rights grounds (Articles 2 and 3) stand


Signed      [pic]      Date 11 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

