
                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12957/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2020                           |On 27 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HON. MR JUSTICE CHAMBERLAIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                     and
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                  OS (Iran)
                         (anomymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Keith Gayle, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal from a decision of Judge Alis ('the judge'),  sitting
    in the First-tier Tribunal. In the decision, promulgated on  22  August
    2019, the judge dismissed OS's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    decision of 16 October 2017 to refuse his human  rights  claim  and  to
    give notice of a decision to deport him.

Background

 2. OS is a national of Iran. He was born on 1 January 1992. He entered the
    UK in 2008 and claimed asylum. His asylum claim was refused  on  1  May
    2009, but he was granted leave to remain as a minor until 1 July  2009.
    On 12 June 2009, he applied for further leave to remain. On 10 February
    2011 his application for discretionary leave on humanitarian protection
    grounds was refused with an in-country right of appeal. He appealed and
    his appeal was dismissed on 20 April 2011.  A  further  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was successful on human rights grounds only  on  13  May
    2013 (his asylum appeal was dismissed). He  was  granted  discretionary
    leave until 23 November 2015. On  20  November  2015,  OS  Applied  for
    further leave to remain on humanitarian protection grounds.


 3. Before that application could be determined, OS engaged in a course  of
    criminal conduct. Between 4 November 2015  and  26  July  2016  OS  was
    convicted six times of 13 offences. Four of these were for breach of  a
    non-molestation order imposed on him by the Family  Court  following  a
    contested hearing on 7 July 2015.  That  order  prevented  any  contact
    between him and his former partner and prevented him from attending  at
    her address. OS breached this order on four occasions. On the first  he
    was sentenced  to  a  community  order.  On  the  second,  a  suspended
    custodial sentence was imposed. On 26 July  2016,  at  Maidstone  Crown
    Court, he was convicted of the third and fourth breaches, assaulting  a
    constable and assaulting a person assisting a constable, for  which  he
    was sentenced to a total of 17 months' imprisonment and made subject to
    a restraining order under the Protection from Harassment Act 1997.

 4. On 2 November 2016 OS was served with a stage 1 notice of  decision  to
    deport giving him 20 days to provide  reasons  why  he  should  not  be
    deported from the UK. On 30 November  2016  submissions  were  made  by
    solicitors  acting  on  his  behalf,  raising  Article  8  grounds  and
    indicating that he continued to fear persecution on return to  Iran  on
    the ground of his religious faith. On 4 January 2017, he  was  detained
    under immigration powers. He was released on 2 March 2017  pursuant  to
    the Secretary of State's policy on adults at risk. On 16 October 2017 a
    decision was made  to  refuse  OS's  human  rights  claim  and  further
    submissions. That decision attracted an in-country right of appeal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 5. The judge summarised OS's claim at [26]-[34] of the decision. It was as
    follows. His mother belonged to the Baha'i faith  but  until  2018,  OS
    himself had never considered converting. He first became interested  in
    converting on 28 April 2018 after his friend encouraged him  to  do  so
    because he thought it might help OS with his personal problems and drug
    issues. He could not remember where he had gone for his first  meeting,
    but there were about 30 people present.  Since  then  he  has  attended
    numerous gatherings, which take place at private houses.  He  has  read
    four of the 10 core books of the faith and has received a welcome email
    and membership card from the organisation. He maintained that he  would
    be at risk on return for two reasons. First, his mother, who  lived  in
    Iran, was a member of the  Baha'i  faith.  Second,  he  would  have  to
    disclose his conversion when questioned.

 6. Under cross-examination, he explained  that  no  one  from  the  Baha'i
    organisation could attend to give  evidence  on  his  behalf.  Although
    there were witness statements from three witnesses he had not told  any
    of them about the hearing until the previous week,  when  he  tried  to
    contact them. They were all working and none could attend.

 7. At [45], the judge set out relevant extracts dealing with the  position
    of the  Baha'i  from  the  Secretary  of  State's  country  information
    document on Iran, published in November  2016.  That  document  details
    widespread discrimination against Baha'i by the Iranian government.  It
    provides as follows:

         'Decision-makers should no longer continue to follow  the  guidance
         contained in the Country Guidance (CG) case of SH (Baha'is) Iran CG
         [2006] UKAIT 00041 which found that the Baha'is are not at  general
         risk of persecution in Iran, but that a  Baha'i  will  be  able  to
         demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution if, on the facts  of
         the case, he or she is reasonably likely  to  be  targeted  by  the
         Iranians authorities (or their agents) for religious reasons  (para
         81). Since SH was promulgated 10 years ago, however, the  situation
         in Iran has deteriorated for religious minorities  in  general  and
         for the Baha'i in particular.


         In general, a person is likely to face a real risk  of  persecution
         or serious harm from the state on the basis of their  Baha'i  faith
         and the grant of asylum will usually be appropriate.'


 8. At [46], the judge directed himself that, if OS was a genuine  convert,
    he would be at risk of persecution and would be entitled to  protection
    under the refugee  Convention.  If,  however,  he  was  not  a  genuine
    convert, then he would be returnable to Iran following the decisions of
    this Tribunal in SSH and HR (Illegal exit: failed asylum  seeker)  Iran
    CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) and HB (Kurds) CG [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC).


 9. At [47], the judge noted that OS's claim  that  he  would  be  at  risk
    because of his mother's Baha'i faith had been considered  and  rejected
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein in his decision of 8 May 2013.

10. The judge's findings about OS's claim to conversion were as follows. At
    [50], he accepted that OS had been 'accepted into  the  Baha'i  faith',
    but noted that he had 'only sought to convert  after  he  received  the
    deportation papers'. At [51], he noted that OS had called no  one  from
    the organisation to  corroborate  his  conversion.  The  email  'simply
    welcomes him' and was 'akin to joining a gym  and  nothing  more'.  The
    membership card 'simply confirms he joined'. Neither was evidence  that
    he is 'a genuine member of the organisation or a  genuine  follower  of
    the faith'. At [52], the judge observed that the email contained  three
    contacts to whom OS could have turned. At  [53],  the  judge  made  the
    point that any of these could have confirmed this to  OS's  involvement
    in the faith but no evidence had been adduced  from  any  of  them.  At
    [54], the judge noted that OS had been vague about the location of  the
    meetings he had attended and found that if he had told anyone attending
    those meetings that he was at  risk  of  removal,  someone  would  have
    attended to give evidence in his support. At [55 ]-[57], the judge held
    as follows:


         '55. I am not satisfied the appellant  is  a  genuine  convert  and
         consequently I am not satisfied he is  a  follower  of  the  Baha'i
         faith. Whilst he is not required to lie under questioning,  I  find
         he has nothing to lie about because he is not a genuine follower. I
         am not satisfied he has been to meetings as he  claimed  or  played
         any role within the organisation.


         56. Even if his mother was a follower there is  no  evidence  about
         her or that he would be at risk simply because she was a follower.


         57. Based on him  having  no  adverse  profile  and  following  the
         guidance issued in SSH and HR and HB (Kurds), I find returning  him
         would not place him at risk of persecution or serious harm.'


11. The judge therefore upheld the deportation  order  and  dismissed  OS's
    human rights appeal.


Submissions on behalf of OS

12. On behalf of OS, Mr Gayle emphasised that the appeal  ultimately  heard
    by the judge on 13 August 2019 had  previously  been  adjourned.  At  a
    hearing on 9 November 2018 OS attended with two witnesses  prepared  to
    attest to  the  genuineness  of  his  conversion.  Further  substantive
    hearings listed for 11 December 2018, 22 March 2019 and 24  April  2019
    were each adjourned. It was unclear whether the hearing  on  13  August
    2019 would proceed. We asked Mr Gayle whether any application had  been
    made at that hearing for an adjournment.  He  confirmed  that  no  such
    application had been made.


13. Mr  Gayle  submitted  that  the  judge  materially  misrepresented  the
    findings of Upper Tribunal Judge  Goldstein  in  the  previous  appeal.
    Contrary to the judge's understanding, Judge Goldstein had  entertained
    no doubt that  OS's  mother  was  a  Baha'i.  This,  he  said,  fatally
    undermined the judge's assessment of risk on return to Iran.

14. Mr Gayle criticised the judge's findings about the significance of  the
    email and membership card as  'perverse'.  Contrary  to  his  findings,
    these documents were 'compelling' evidence of the genuineness  of  OS's
    conversion. He submitted that the  judge  had  erred  by  applying  the
    approach  recommended  in  Christian  conversion  cases  to  a   Baha'i
    conversion. Reliance was placed on the decision of the Inner  House  of
    the Court of Session in TF and MA v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] CSIH 58.

15. In oral submissions, Mr Gayle said that OS was entitled to succeed even
    if his conversion was not genuine. This was  because,  on  the  judge's
    findings, OS had been formally accepted into the faith and this  formal
    acceptance was something he would have to mention  if  he  gave  honest
    answers when questioned on return.  Since it was likely that any failed
    asylum seeker would be questioned about his activities in the  UK,  and
    in particular any  non-Islamic  religious  activities,  and  it  was  a
    general principle that returnees should not be expected to lie, it  was
    inevitable that OS would have to disclose the fact  of  his  acceptance
    into the Baha'i faith. This would render him liable to persecution even
    if the reason for his application and acceptance into the faith was  to
    bolster his claim to stay in the UK, rather than because of  a  genuine
    conversion.

Discussion

16. We consider first the judge's rejection  of  the  genuineness  of  OS's
    conversion. The language used by the judge, in likening the email  from
    the National Spiritual Assembly to the kind  of  email  that  might  be
    received on joining a gym, was in our view not helpful or  appropriate.
    But the question for us is whether the judge erred in law. That depends
    on a consideration of the substance of the point  he  was  making,  not
    just the language in which it was couched. The  point  being  made  was
    that the email and membership card were of little evidential  value  on
    their own given that they were not accompanied by evidence from members
    of  the  Baha'i  community  attesting  to  the  genuineness   of   OS's
    conversion.


17. In our view, that conclusion was clearly open to  the  judge.  We  have
    ourselves considered that email and the accompanying  membership  card.
    The judge did not doubt the authenticity of these documents; and nor do
    we. But neither of them explains the basis or evidence  upon  which  it
    was issued. It may well be that documents such as  this  would  not  be
    issued unless the issuer believed  that  the  person  concerned  was  a
    genuine convert. But the documents themselves  say  nothing  about  the
    basis of the issuer's belief or the process followed  in  that  regard.
    The judge was in our view entitled to find  that,  on  their  own,  the
    documents proved nothing, other than OS's  formal  reception  into  the
    Baha'i faith.

18. Mr Gayle's oral submission before us was it was 'well known'  that  the
    National Spiritual Assembly was careful in issuing such documents  only
    to genuine converts. The difficulty with  that  submission  (as  indeed
    with any submission which takes as its starting point that something is
    'well known') is that it invites a conclusion based on something  other
    than evidence in the case. There are limited circumstances in  which  a
    court or tribunal is entitled to take 'judicial notice' of a fact  that
    is  not  established  by  evidence  in  the  case.  The  procedure  and
    substantive conditions for the issue of documents of the kind seen here
    by the National Spiritual Assembly are  certainly  not,  in  our  view,
    matters of which judicial notice can  properly  be  taken.  It  cannot,
    therefore, be said that the judge acted perversely in  concluding  that
    the documents themselves did not show that OS was a genuine convert.

19. We turn  next  to  the  submission  that  the  judge's  conclusion  was
    inconsistent with the approach of the Extra Division of the Inner House
    of the Court of Session in TF (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2018] CSIH 58, 2019 SC 81. In that case, there was an issue
    about the genuineness of a claimed  conversion  to  Christianity.  Lord
    Glennie (speaking for himself, Lady  Paton  and  Lord  Drummond  Young)
    noted at [44] that it was not possible to 'open  windows  on  to  men's
    souls', borrowing the aphorism generally attributed to Elizabeth I.  It
    was  therefore  necessary,  in  determining  the   genuineness   of   a
    conversion, to draw  inferences  from  more  easily  ascertainable  and
    concrete facts, such  as  regular  attendance  at  religious  services.
    Active participation in a Christian church was not conclusive  evidence
    of the genuineness of a claimed conversion, but it was 'likely to be  a
    very  powerful  consideration,  to  be  assessed  alongside  any  other
    evidence  pointing  to  the  sincerity  or  otherwise  of  the  claimed
    conversion to Christianity'.

20. The remainder of the Opinion was concerned with the  type  of  evidence
    that would be admissible to support the genuineness of a conversion  to
    Christianity. At [58], the Court  disapproved  the  suggestion  of  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Dorodian v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department,  01/TH/01537,  23  August  2001,  at  [8(b)],  that  a
    Christian conversion must be supported by evidence from a minister of a
    relevant  church.  Because  different   churches   followed   different
    traditions, it was wrong to say that the  evidence  had  to  come  from
    someone at a particular level in the hierarchy (if any) of the  church.
    What mattered was that the evidence came from individuals with

         'sufficient knowledge of the practices of the church of which  they
         are a member; sufficient experience of  observing  and  interacting
         with those seeking to become  members  of  the  church;  sufficient
         knowledge and experience of others who have  gone  through  similar
         processes of  engagement  in  church  activities  with  a  view  to
         becoming members of the  church;  and,  in  cases  such  as  these,
         sufficient knowledge of the individuals concerned and of the manner
         in which they have thrown themselves into church activities.'


21. In TF, there had been independent  evidence,  including  oral  evidence
    from one  witness,  to  support  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's
    conversion. This evidence was detailed and extensive, as  can  be  seen
    from [9]-[16] of the Opinion. It was  the  failure  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to engage with this evidence which justified the  decision  to
    the Court of Session to allow the appeal and remit the matter  to  that
    tribunal: see [62] and [65].


22. We do not detect in the judge's  reasoning  in  the  present  case  any
    reliance on the approach in [8(b)] of  Dorodian,  which  the  Court  of
    Session disapproved. The judge did not suggest that the only acceptable
    evidence was that of a minister (or equivalent) in  the  Baha'i  faith.
    The problem here was that there was no independent evidence of the kind
    which impressed the Court of Session in TF. OS had called 'no one  from
    the organisation to support his conversion' or who could 'vouch for his
    attendance and work within the faith'. Unlike TF, this was not  a  case
    where the  appellant  had  been  actively  participating  in  religious
    activities, but the judge sought to 'open a window on to [his] soul' by
    questioning his motives for doing so. Here, the judge  did  not  accept
    that OS was an active participant at all.

23.  We  have  considered  with  care  the  reasoning   underpinning   this
    conclusion, at [50]-[55]. The judge noted that the  witnesses  that  OS
    had wished to call (but who were not present on  the  day  the  hearing
    took place) were not even members of the faith: [54]. They  would  not,
    therefore, have satisfied the conditions set out at [58] of TF. Equally
    importantly, as the judge noted at  [52],  the  membership  email  gave
    three contacts, any of whom could have  been  called  to  support  OS's
    case. None of them was in fact called; and no application was made  for
    an adjournment. In those circumstances, it was, in our  judgment,  open
    to the judge to conclude that the claimed conversion - which post-dated
    the decision to deport and coincided with the appeal proceedings -  was
    not genuine. We detect no error of law in  this  part  of  the  judge's
    decision.

24. We turn now to Mr Gayle's submission that, even if the  conversion  was
    not genuine, the fact of his reception as a member  of  the  faith  (as
    evidenced by the email and membership card) was enough  to  generate  a
    well-founded fear of  persecution  or  a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment
    contrary to Article 3 ECHR. Mr  Gayle's  argument  proceeded  in  three
    steps. First, he said that OS would, like any returnee,  be  questioned
    on return to Iran about his activities in the UK -  and  in  particular
    any non-Islamic religious activities. In  his  case,  the  prospect  of
    questioning about religious activities was even  more  likely  than  in
    other cases, because his mother is Baha'i. Second,  he  should  not  be
    expected to lie and, if he told the truth, would have  to  explain  the
    fact of his reception  into  the  Baha'i  faith.  Third,  even  if  his
    conversion was in fact  not  genuine,  the  Iranian  authorities  might
    either (i) not believe that and so regard him as an  apostate  or  (ii)
    take his false claim of conversion as an insult to their country and/or
    religion and, in either case, subject him to ill-treatment as a result.

25. SSH (Illegal exit: failed asylum seekers) Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308
    (IAC) establishes that those returning to Iran on a laissez passer  (as
    opposed to a passport) are likely to be questioned on  return.  We  are
    prepared to accept that it is likely that a  person  in  OS's  position
    would be questioned in general terms about his activities  in  the  UK;
    and that it is possible that the fact (if it be a fact) of his mother's
    Baha'i faith may (perhaps) be known to the authorities and  may  prompt
    specific questioning of him. We have  much  more  difficulty  with  the
    remainder of the argument. On the judge's findings, which  we  consider
    he was entitled to make, OS's conversion was not genuine. He is not, in
    any real or  substantial  sense,  a  member  of  the  Baha'i  faith  or
    community. If asked whether he has converted to the Baha'i  faith,  the
    honest answer would be 'No'.

26. HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC  10,
    [2011] AC 596 was an important decision. It established  that  gay  men
    and women who would otherwise be open about their sexuality, but  would
    be forced to hide it to avoid persecution,  were  entitled  to  refugee
    status. The key question  in  the  case  of  a  particular  gay  asylum
    applicant was whether he or she would be discreet anyway (in which case
    there would be no well-founded fear of persecution  on  the  ground  of
    sexuality if the authorities would not discover his sexuality) or would
    otherwise have been open about his or her sexuality, but would hide  it
    because of a well-founded fear of persecution (in which case the  claim
    would succeed): see esp. [82]-[83] (Lord Rodger, with whom Lord Walker,
    Lord Collins and Lord Dyson agreed). The same approach has been applied
    to political opinion in RT (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2012] UKSC, [2013] 1 AC 152 and to religious belief  in  WA
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ
    302. If an individual on return would otherwise engage in overt conduct
    which manifests his or her religious belief,  but  would  refrain  from
    that conduct out of a well-founded fear of persecution, he  or  she  is
    entitled to refugee status.

27. The present situation seems to us very far from engaging any  principle
    that can be derived from these cases. On the  findings  of  the  judge,
    there is no question of OS having to suppress any overt  conduct  which
    manifests his Baha'i religious beliefs, because he has no such beliefs.
    There is nothing in any of the cases we have referred to, or  otherwise
    as far as we are aware, to  suggest  that  a  person  who  has  falsely
    claimed to have converted must, on return to  his  country  of  origin,
    declare that he has made such a  false  claim,  or  that  he  has  been
    received into a faith community as part  of  a  fraudulent  attempt  to
    bolster his asylum claim in the UK, to the authorities there. The judge
    did not, therefore, err in law when he concluded that OS  has  'nothing
    to lie about because he is not a genuine follower'.


28. We can accept that there may be situations where the fact of  reception
    into a particular faith would give  rise  to  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution, even if the claim to have converted is  false.  But  there
    would have to be evidence to support the risk of persecution, or of ill-
    treatment contrary to the Convention, in such  a  case.  We  have  seen
    nothing to support the suggestion that  the  Iranian  authorities  have
    access to the National Spiritual Assembly's records or would  otherwise
    know that OS has been received as a member of the Baha'i faith. Even if
    they did have such access, or if OS disclosed it to them in  interview,
    we see no reason to suppose that they would not accept  the  truth,  as
    the judge found it to be: that the  claim  to  have  converted  to  the
    Baha'i faith was manufactured to support  his  asylum  claim.  In  this
    respect, we note the findings of the Swiss authorities, referred to  by
    the European Court  of  Human  Rights  in  A  v  Switzerland  App.  No.
    02342/16, judgment 19 December 2017, at [20] and [43], that the Iranian
    authorities are well aware (and  take  into  account)  that  applicants
    often falsely claim that they have undergone sur place  conversions  in
    order to bolster their asylum claims. The suggestion that  the  Iranian
    authorities would regard such  false  claims  as  an  insult  to  their
    country or religion and visit ill-treatment on returnees  as  a  result
    was not supported by any evidence. It was no more than speculation.

29. For these reasons, we dismiss this appeal.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law. The appeal is dismissed.


Martin Chamberlain
The Hon. Mr Justice Chamberlain


2 February 2020

