
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12223/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard on 7th September 2020          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|At Civil Justice Centre (remote      |On 10 September 2020                 |
|hearing)                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     KI
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild and
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born  in  1997.   He  appeals  with
    permission against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  JK
    Thapar) to dismiss his appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant's  case  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  included  the
    following submissions:

      i) Notwithstanding the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  SMO  and
         Others (Article 15(c): identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT  400
         (IAC) to the effect that conditions  in  the  formerly   'contested
         territories' no longer engaged Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification
         Directive as far as the general population was concerned, he  could
         demonstrate that he fell into an enhanced  Elgafaji  risk  category
         because he was a Sunni Kurd from Mosul;

     ii) As an undocumented returnee his appeal fell to be allowed  pursuant
         to Article 3/Article 15(b) of the Qualification  Directive  because
         he would not be able to make the journey from Baghdad to  his  home
         area without encountering conditions that amounted to  inhuman  and
         degrading treatment.

 3. In respect of (i) the First-tier Tribunal makes no findings. In respect
    of (ii) the Tribunal  noted  that  there  were  material  discrepancies
    between the Appellant's evidence about his documentation  and  what  he
    had told an earlier Tribunal (chaired by Judge Brookfield in 2018). Now
    he said that he had never been issued with a  CSID,  despite  being  19
    when he left Iraq;  in  2018  he  is  recorded  as  having  told  Judge
    Brookfield that he gave his CSID to an agent in Turkey.   Although  the
    Appellant had attended the Iraqi embassy in London to ostensibly obtain
    new documents, he did not do  so  in  good  faith.  He  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that he had provided the kind  of  information  that  would
    have been required. In any event, the Tribunal found, he has family  in
    Iraq who could assist him in obtaining a new CSID once there.

 4. Ms Smith's point on (i) was  predictably  brief.  Her  lay  client  was
    entitled to have his protection submissions dealt with. The failure  to
    do so amounted to an error of law. Mr McVeety agreed, and so do I.

 5. On point (ii) the parties were also in agreement. The Appellant is  not
    from the IKR, but from Iraq proper. As such  he  will  be  returned  to
    Baghdad. The question for the Tribunal, applying SMO, was  therefore  a
    simple one. Will the Appellant be able, within  a  reasonable  time  of
    arriving in the country, be able to obtain the  relevant  documentation
    to enable him to safely travel home and/ or support himself.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal's first conclusion on this point, that  he  may
    be able to obtain a new document in  London,  fails  to  take  material
    country guidance into account: in  three  successive  country  guidance
    cases[1] Dr Fatah has given extensive evidence about  the  difficulties
    in obtaining any assistance from the embassy in  London.  His  accepted
    evidence has consistently been that although  it  remains  possible  to
    obtain documentation from the embassy here, the  reasonable  likelihood
    of someone being unable to do so must be  evaluated  in  light  of  the
    multiple obstructions to the operation of good  administration  on  the
    part of the Iraqi authorities:  the  de-Ba'athification  of  the  civil
    service, corruption, inefficiency and  that  in  the  context  of  many
    millions of undocumented Iraqis the problems  of  individual  returnees
    are seen as "trivial".  The fact that this evidence is  uncontested  is
    confirmed by the current CPIN: as  of  June  2020  the  Respondent  has
    adopted the  position  that  it  would  be  "highly  unlikely  that  an
    individual would be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy  while
    in  the  United  Kingdom"  [CPIN  Iraq:  Internal   relocation,   civil
    documentation and returns at 2.6.16].

 7.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  alternative  case  theory  was  that  the
    Appellant has family in Iraq who could assist him in  obtaining  a  new
    CSID. On this point, Ms Smith submits, the Tribunal failed  to  address
    at all the evidence set out  in  SMO  about  the  new  INID  system  in
    operation in in most of Iraq.  If,  as  Ms  Smith  submits,  the  civil
    registry for Nineveh is operating  this  new  system,  it  matters  not
    whether the Appellant has relatives there, since the Iraqi  authorities
    will not issue the new cards to a proxy: the point of the INID is  that
    it contains biometric data which can only be obtained from  the  holder
    in person.

 8. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  therefore  set  aside  by
    consent.    The questions to be decided in remaking are:

      a) Whether  the  Appellant  requires  international  protection  under
         Article 15(c);

      b) In respect of Article 15(b) whether the  Appellant  will  be  able,
         within a reasonable time of arriving in Baghdad, be able to  obtain
         valid identity documentation  enabling  him  to  travel,  work  and
         obtain essential services such as housing.

 9. The parties agreed that these issues are  likely  to  necessitate  live
    evidence being called and  extensive  findings  of  fact  such  that  a
    remittal to the First-tier Tribunal would be appropriate.




    Anonymity Order

10. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decision and Directions

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.

12. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal

13. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          7th September 2020
                                                     -----------------------
[1]  SMO, AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) and AAH (Kurds
- internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC)

