
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12111/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2019                     |On 30 May 2019                       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Maqsood, instructed by Shah Jalal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure of any matter likely  to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the respondent (RA).  A failure to comply with this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State,  we  shall  for
    convenience refer to the parties as they appeared before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born  on  14  November
    1979.

 4. On 23 July 2016, he was encountered by an Immigration Officer  and  was
    detained and served with Immigration Notice IS.91.

 5. On 28 July 2016, whilst in detention awaiting  removal,  the  appellant
    claimed asylum.  There followed a Statement of Evidence Form (SEF) on 5
    January 2017 and an asylum interview on 5 January 2017.

 6. The appellant's claim was that he had entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    March 2005 as a result of problems he faced in  Bangladesh  because  of
    his political opinion.  He claimed to be an active member  of  the  BNP
    and also to be involved in a land dispute with  members  of  the  Awami
    League.  He claimed that as a result of an incident in  February  2004,
    he left Bangladesh.  He claimed that after he had left Bangladesh,  his
    house was attacked and his family were advised that if he was caught he
    would be killed.  He claimed that a false case was lodged  against  his
    brother.  He feared that if he  returned  to  Bangladesh  he  would  be
    killed by the Awami League.

 7. On 18 August 2017, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 18 January 2018, Judge J Eames allowed the  appellant's  appeal
    on asylum grounds.  He found the appellant's account to be credible and
    he accepted that he was an active and prominent member of the  BNP  who
    had been arrested and detained on a  politically  motivated  basis  and
    that, as a perceived political opponent, he would be at risk  from  the
    Awami League on return to Bangladesh.

 9. On 24 January 2018, the Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal
    challenging the judge's  positive  credibility  finding  and  also  his
    acceptance that the appellant was at  risk  on  return  to  Bangladesh,
    thirteen years after he claimed to have left Bangladesh.

10. On 6 February 2018, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pedro)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.   The appellant did not file a rule  24
    response.

Submissions

11. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Mills  sought  to  focus  the
    points raised in the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal.   He
    focussed upon paras 70(a) - (f) and the judge's reasoning that led  him
    in para 71 to make his positive credibility finding and at para  72  to
    find, in the appellant's favour, that the basis of  his  claim  arising
    from his political opinion was  established.   In  addition,  Mr  Mills
    submitted that, in any event, the judge had failed properly to consider
    whether the appellant was currently at risk, and  of  interest  to  the
    Awami League, given that he had, in his claim, said that  he  had  left
    Bangladesh in 2005 and had at best a  mid-ranking  local  role  between
    2002 and 2005.

12. Mr Maqsood submitted that the judge's reasons at paras 70(a) - (f) were
    legally sustainable.  Further, on the judge's findings, the  judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant would  be  a  "perceived  political
    opponent" and at risk on return to Bangladesh and since his fear  arose
    from state actors, internal relocation and  sufficiency  of  protection
    was not available.

13. We will deal with the detail of the submission shortly.

14. We begin, however, with the judge's reasons.

Discussion

15. As we have  indicated,  the  judge's  reasons  for  making  a  positive
    credibility finding (at [71}) and  accepting  the  appellant's  account
    which put him at risk (at [72}) are set out in the six paras  at  paras
    70(a) - (f).

16. In considering those reasons, it is important to note  the  context  of
    the appellant's asylum claim made on 28 July 2016.  As we have  already
    identified, in that claim the appellant claimed to have entered the  UK
    in March 2005 using his own passport.  In the course of his claim,  the
    appellant accepted that he had previously made an Art  8  claim  on  14
    November 2017 in a different and false name,  namely  Poblu  Miah.   In
    that earlier claim, he had said that he had entered the United  Kingdom
    in January 2001 using that alias  or  false  name.   That,  of  course,
    differed from his account in his present application which was that  he
    had not left Bangladesh and come to  the  UK  until  March  2005.   His
    earlier claim had been refused (with a right of  appeal)  on  29  April
    2008 and he was served, in  the  alias  name  with  notice  of  removal
    (IS.151A) on 19 May 2008.

17. Not unsurprisingly, this accepted deceptive conduct  by  the  appellant
    featured  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  the  appellant's
    credibility was not to be accepted in respect of his claim as  now  put
    in his 2016 application for asylum.

18. Judge Eames dealt with the relevance of this matter both in para  70(a)
    and para 70(f).

19. At para 70(a) the judge said this:

          "Ms Curran [the Presenting Officer] reasonably  enough  points  to
         the appellant's use of an alias name in his  previous  application.
         He has explained this by saying this was name he was also called by
         in Bangladesh.  That particular explanation has not been  addressed
         by the respondent.  But the burden, low though it is, lies  on  the
         appellant.  I take into account the fact that as Mr  Raza  [Counsel
         for the appellant] rightly says it is  the  appellant  himself  who
         drew attention to the fact that he  had  used  an  alias.   Perhaps
         there is only a fine difference between the notion of an alias  and
         that of a false name.  In my view it is likely that  the  appellant
         had good reason to use a name which on his own  oral  evidence  was
         one that he was already called in the  alternative.   As  a  person
         allegedly being trafficked into the country by an  agent  (although
         one also loosely described as a friend) it is not unlikely he would
         be under the instruction of that agent and would have done what  he
         was told.  None of that is honest or honourable behaviour.  On  the
         contrary.  But it is reasonably consistent with how asylum  seekers
         may have to behave.  So when assessing  the  impact  of  the  alias
         story on his overall credibility I am willing to believe  that  the
         use of an alias does not negate  or  invalidate  the  core  of  his
         asylum claim.  It is not to be condoned, but does not mean that  he
         is overall dishonest."

20. At 70(f) the judge said this in relation  to  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004:

         "Underlying the respondent's overall view of  credibility  are  her
         two section 8 points (of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of
         Claimants, etc) Act 2004), the delay in claiming asylum and use  of
         a false name.  In my view  the  reasoning  behind  using  an  alias
         adequately  explains  it  in  a  way  that  does  not  impugn   the
         appellant's overall honesty.  I addressed this above.  His delay in
         claiming asylum after arriving in the UK was again not particularly
         honourable or attractive behaviour, once  his  leave  had  expired.
         But until his leave expired,  I  do  not  consider  there  was  any
         pressing duty or requirement on the appellant to  put  forward  his
         alternative reason for being in the UK, given that he had leave  on
         a genuine and  bona  fide  basis,  and  that  sufficed  during  its
         currency.  But once it had run out, a genuine question arises as to
         how far his credibility is undermined by his continuing failure  to
         claim asylum.  In my view the  explanation  for  what  he  did  was
         simply that he was in the UK, life for him in the UK  continued  to
         be possible without status, and he took a dishonourable  gamble  on
         that being a sustainable position, balanced against the  risk  that
         if he did make his asylum claim there was the chance  it  would  be
         turned  down.   People  sometimes  make  those  calculations  about
         lodging an asylum claim, and  whilst  it  does  not  enhance  their
         compliance with Immigration Rules, it  certainly  does  not  always
         mean they are dishonest.  That I take to be the position here  with
         this appellant.  It is unworthy, and discredits him  to  a  degree,
         but it does not overall mean that I find him lacking credibility."

21. Mr Mills submitted that the judge had failed in para 70(a)  to  explain
    why the appellant's use of a  false  name  in  his  2007  human  rights
    application was explicable on the basis that  he  had  been  under  the
    influence of an agent who had trafficked  him  into  the  UK.   On  his
    account in the present application, that was some two  to  three  years
    after he had entered the UK in 2005.  Mr Mills submitted that,  without
    further reasoning, the judge had failed properly to  explain  why  this
    past deception was not  relevant  to  the  appellant's  credibility  in
    respect of his present application.

22. Further, as regards para 70(f), Mr Mills submitted that the  judge  was
    simply wrong to state that the appellant's delay in claiming asylum was
    not a relevant matter damaging of his credibility under s.8 of the 2004
    Act.

23. Mr Maqsood submitted that it was clear that in para 70(a) the judge was
    fully alive to the appellant's previous conduct which he  accepted  was
    not  honest  or  honourable  behaviour.   Nevertheless,  he  had  given
    sufficient reasons for finding that  this  earlier  deception  did  not
    affect the appellant's credibility or go to the "core" of his claim.

24. In respect of para 70(f), Mr Maqsood submitted that the judge had dealt
    with the delay in the appellant claiming asylum  and,  therefore,  that
    s.8 of the 2004 Act did not apply to damage his credibility.

25. In substance, we accept Mr Mills'  submissions.   In  respect  of  para
    70(a), before the judge the appellant accepted, in essence, that he had
    previously used deception in making his  human  rights  application  in
    2007.  He had used an alias or false name and, at least contrary to his
    account in the present application, he had claimed to enter the  UK  in
    2001.  His present application claimed that he had entered  the  UK  in
    2005.  Indeed, he relied upon adverse events  in  Bangladesh  prior  to
    2005 when, in his earlier application, he had claimed to be in the  UK.
    Whilst an individual's previous dishonest  or  deceptive  conduct  does
    not, in itself, mean that he or she has necessarily been  dishonest  in
    relation to the matters raised in  their  more  recent  claim,  if  not
    adequately explained, that is a  relevant  matter  in  assessing  their
    general  credibility  and  honesty.   A  person  who  has  been   shown
    previously to be dishonest, or as in  this  case  effectively  accepted
    themselves that they were dishonest, necessarily  calls  into  question
    their general truthfulness and whether they should be believed in  what
    they say is now the true circumstances.

26. Further, in para  70(a),  the  judge  explained  away  the  appellant's
    dishonesty or deceptive behaviour in 2008 as  a  person  who  had  been
    "trafficked into the country by an agent...it is not unlikely he  would
    be under the instruction of that agent and would have done what he  was
    told."  Whilst that might explain the use of an  alias  or  false  name
    (including it would seem a false passport) being used on  entry  (which
    the appellant claimed in his earlier  application  was  in  2001),  the
    judge gave inadequate reasons for  considering  that  that  explanation
    carried on  until  2007  when  the  appellant  made  his  human  rights
    application in the false name or alias.  Even if the appellant were  to
    be accepted (as is his current claim) to have entered the UK  in  2005,
    that would be between 2 and  3  years  before  his  2007  human  rights
    application.  The absence of any adequate  explanation  as  to  why  he
    continued to use a false name or alias provided no basis for  ignoring,
    and failing to properly take into account, his  earlier  dishonesty  or
    deceptive  behaviour  as  relevant  to  his  general  credibility  and,
    therefore, the veracity of his current account.

27. As regards para 70(f), the appellant undoubtedly  delayed  in  claiming
    asylum until 2016 from 2005 (when on his current application he claimed
    to enter) or 2001 (when on his previous application he claimed to  have
    entered).  He had also previously used a false name or alias.  Both  of
    these matters fell within s.8 of the 2004 Act.  His previous  deceptive
    behaviour was "designed or likely to conceal information" or  "designed
    or likely to mislead" (s.8(2)).  Likewise, his delay in claiming asylum
    fell within s.8(5) as it was a  failure  by  him  "to  make  an  asylum
    claim...before being notified of an immigration  decision,  unless  the
    claim relies wholly on matters arising after the notification."

28. In regard to  both  of  those  matters,  at  least  without  reasonable
    explanation,  they  were  potentially  "damaging"  of  the  appellant's
    credibility. Any explanation for his previous  dishonest  or  deceptive
    behaviour, to the extent that the judge relied on  the  reason  he  had
    already given in para 70(a), could not as we have already noted suffice
    as a matter  of  law  to  explain  away  that  dishonest  or  deceptive
    behaviour.

29. In relation to the delay in claiming asylum, the judge's reasoning  is,
    to say the least, little more than saying  that  the  appellant  simply
    took a "gamble" that, in effect, he would not be apprehended or was  to
    avoid the risk of having his claim turned down.  We find that reasoning
    difficult, in principle, to found a reasonable excuse so as  to  negate
    the underlying policy in  s.8  that  a  delay  in  claiming  asylum  is
    "damaging" of a claimant's credibility.

30. In any event, as we pointed out at the hearing, the  judge's  reasoning
    ignores the fact that the appellant did in fact make a claim,  a  human
    rights claim, in 2007.  Further, on 29 April 2008,  the  appellant  was
    given notice that that claim was refused and the appellant was  invited
    under s.120 to make any further representation as to why he  should  be
    permitted to remain in the UK.  The appellant did not  then  raise  his
    asylum claim.  He delayed doing so, for  no  explicable  reason,  until
    2016, some  eight  years  later.   The  judge's  explanation  that  the
    appellant took a "dishonourable gamble" cannot bear the weight he gives
    it in the light of the full opportunity that the appellant was given in
    2007/08 to make an asylum claim when he was both making a human rights'
    claim and had been invited to raise  any  other  grounds  on  which  he
    wished to claim that he was entitled to remain in the UK.

31. In our judgment, the appellant's conduct plainly fell  within  s.8,  in
    particular within s.8(5), in that he failed to make  his  asylum  claim
    before being notified of an immigration  decision,  most  recently  the
    IS.91 on 23 July 2006 and, more generally, in response to  the  refusal
    of his human rights claim on 29 April 2008.

32. We have concluded that the judge's reasoning in  paras  70(a)  and  (f)
    cannot be sustained.  The judge was not entitled to reach the views  he
    did on these matters as not damaging the appellant's credibility and he
    was not entitled to discount the requirements of s.8 of the 2004 Act in
    the way or for the reasons he did.

33. Mr Mills also challenged the judge's reasoning in para 70(b)  in  which
    the judge made, in effect, a positive identification of  the  appellant
    based upon a number of photocopies of photographs  which  it  was  said
    showed him in close proximity to a high profile  BNP  politician.   The
    judge's reasoning was as follows:

         "A central feature of the  appellant's  alleged  poor  credibility,
         according to the respondent, is his claimed membership of BNP.   Ms
         Curran premised this view chiefly on the inadequacy of  the  photos
         at pp87-90.  I remind myself that just because I refused Mr  Raza's
         adjournment application on this very point, this does not mean that
         I am bound to give him the benefit of any doubt about  the  photos.
         It is true that quality is poor and I some of them faces cannot  be
         adequately made out.  However I have scrutinised the top picture on
         page 87 and the bottom pictures on pages 88 and 89.  The person the
         appellant points out as being himself in those  three  photos  does
         indeed bear a decent resemblance to him,  taking  into  account  he
         passage of time and his ageing over some years.  The  face  of  the
         person he points out as himself, especially in the  first  on  page
         87, is clearly visible.  The appellant identifies the person to his
         left - the main speaker in the picture, with a microphone - as  the
         then BNP-affiliated finance minister.  That particular fact has not
         been disputed by  the  respondent.   The  appellant  answered  that
         question readily and promptly in oral  evidence.   I  find  to  the
         lower standard of proof that he is right about  the  speaker  being
         the  finance  minister  and  right  about  himself  being  on   the
         minister's right-hand  side.   In  terms  of  position  within  the
         hierarchy, I'm not persuaded that this must mean the appellant  had
         a named position relation  to  the  finance  minister,  but  he  is
         plainly prominent in the photo, trusted  enough  by  the  party  to
         stand right next to a minister, and evidently enjoys at least  some
         status within the ranks.  Turning to the second picture on page 88,
         once again the appellant here is in a prominent position, this time
         more persuasively as part of a panel at a desk on a stage.  Again I
         think it reasonably likely that that event is  a  party  BNP  event
         involving  important  members.   There  can  be  no  doubting   the
         appellant's prominence at this event or his importance  within  the
         party hierarchy at that event.  The third photo  I  highlight,  the
         lower one on page 89, tells me a little less, in that it is plainly
         a demo which would perhaps have been less exclusive in terms of who
         was able to attend and get photographed.  Nevertheless, the  person
         the appellant identifies as himself in this  picture  is  certainly
         right at the front of the demo or  that  part  of  the  demo.   His
         attendance at  this  event  does  not  look  casual  or  contrived.
         Applying the lower standard of proof, I find it  reasonably  likely
         that the appellant was attending all these events,  and  was  in  a
         position of some importance vis-�-vis the BNP structure."

34. Mr Mills submitted that these photographs were largely  from  the  mid-
    1990s when the appellant was 16 or 17 years old.  He is  now  39  years
    old.  Mr Maqsood,  in  his  submissions,  accepted  that  some  of  the
    photographs did, in fact, relate to when the appellant was some  16  to
    17 years old but some were more recent dating to 1996 and 2001.

35. Whilst clear and unequivocal photographs of an individual  linking  him
    with a particular political event may have  some  evidential  value  in
    supporting his claimed political involvement, a judge should  generally
    be cautious in relying upon visual identity -  comparing  a  photograph
    with an appellant at a hearing - when the photographic evidence is  not
    challenged in any way.  Judges are not experts, in general, in  matters
    of visual identity.  Of course, common  sense  may  drive  a  judge  to
    accept or reject a claimed visual correlation between a photograph  and
    an appellant where there is an unmistakable similarity.  But even then,
    caution needs to be  exercised  as  photographs  can  be  doctored  and
    doppelgangers are not unknown.

36. Here, the judge concluded that there was "decent  resemblance"  between
    the individual in the photographs (said to be the appellant)  and  with
    the  appellant  at  the  hearing.   However,  in  the  photographs  the
    individual was clean shaven whilst the appellant at the hearing  had  a
    beard.  Further, many of  the  photographs  were  said  to  be  of  the
    appellant taken when he was 16 - 17 but at the time of the  hearing  he
    was 39 years old.  In our judgment, the judge placed  an  impermissible
    weight upon the photographic evidence in the light  of  these  matters.
    We would also add that the copies of the photographs  which  the  judge
    consulted were, very largely, poorly reproduced.  At the conclusion  of
    the hearing, we invited Mr Maqsood to provide the originals.   We  have
    assumed those would be available, as it had been claimed  before  Judge
    Eames that they could be obtained but, in  the  event,  he  refused  an
    adjournment to do so.  In the result, we were not provided with any  of
    the photographs which, in fact, in copy form were before the judge.

37. In our judgment, the judge was not entitled to conclude on the basis of
    the copy photographs, based upon his assessment that the individual  in
    the photographs bears a "decent resemblance" to the appellant, that, in
    fact, those are photographs showing the appellant.

38. In our judgment, these flaws in the judge's reasoning  are  significant
    and materially undermine his positive credibility finding.

39. Mr Mills also raised points in relation to paras 70 (c), (d) and (e) of
    the judge's determination.  It is not  necessary  to  deal  with  these
    points in detail as we take the view that,  for  the  reasons  we  have
    already given, the judge's positive credibility finding is  flawed  and
    his decision must, as a result, be set aside.

40. Suffice it to say that Mr Mills did not actively pursue  the  challenge
    to para 70(d) where the judge noted that, although  the  appellant  had
    not referred to his arrest in his asylum interview, as he had  done  so
    in his  earlier  screening  interview.   Mr  Mills  accepted  that  the
    appellant had not been directly asked in his asylum  interview  whether
    he had been arrested.

41. As regard para 70(c), having explained an apparent inconsistency in the
    evidence of a UK based witness, it does not appear that the witness had
    any personal knowledge of the appellant claimed political activities in
    Bangladesh and, as Mr Maqsood submitted, the  judge  had  simply  noted
    that his evidence "does not  advance  the  appellant's  case  all  that
    much".

42. Finally in relation to para 70(e), there was an apparent discrepancy in
    the appellant's evidence as to whether or  not  his  brother  had  been
    falsely accused of murder  or  (as  he  now  claimed)  of  an  incident
    involving  a  burning  car.   The  judge   accepted   the   appellant's
    explanation that  this  inconsistency  or  discrepancy  was  due  to  a
    misunderstanding between him and his representatives.  However, we note
    as Mr Mills submitted,  that  as  this  incident  was  central  to  the
    appellant's claim, the judge nowhere explicitly made any finding as  to
    which version was, as a matter of fact, correct.  It may  be,  however,
    that in accepting the appellant's credibility in respect of his account
    at the  hearing,  the  judge  implicitly  accepted  the  'car  burning'
    incident had occurred.

43. Given our clear view that the judge's reasoning in paras 70(a), (b) and
    (f) cannot stand and that these were significant and  material  to  his
    positive credibility finding, it is unnecessary to consider  Mr  Mills'
    submission in relation to  whether,  if  believed,  the  appellant  was
    properly found to be at risk on return  to  Bangladesh  thirteen  years
    after he left.

44. The judge's findings, flowing from his  positive  credibility  finding,
    are legally flawed and cannot be sustained.  Consequently, his decision
    to allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds cannot  stand  and  a
    fresh assessment of his claim must be made.

Decision

45. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error  of  law.   That
    decision is set aside.

46. Having regard to the nature and extent of fact-finding required and  to
    para 7.2 of the  Senior  President  Practice's  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Eames.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 29 May 2019





