
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12728/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Monday, 2 August 2021                      |On 07 September 2021          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

This is an appeal against the decision dated 12 January 2021 of First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Brien which refused the appellant's asylum and human
rights claim.

The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 13 March 1993.  The
appellant came to the UK on 20 March 2009 and claimed asylum on 21 March
2009.  He did not pursue that claim, absconding immediately after making
it. The application was treated as withdrawn.  At some point in 2012 the
appellant was arrested and came to the attention of the immigration
authorities.  On 9 June 2012 a screening interview was conducted.

Matters did not progress very fast, however. On 15 November 2018 the
appellant made further submissions which were not accepted by the
respondent.  On 16 October 2019 the appellant made further submissions and
this led the respondent to progress the case. The appellant had an asylum
interview on 8 February 2019.  On 10 December 2019 the respondent refused
the appellant's asylum and human rights claim.

The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent and had a
hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 9 September 2020 and 18 November
2020.  As before, in a decision dated 12 January 2021 First-tier Tribunal
Judge O'Brien refused the appeal.

On 24 March 2021 the Upper Tribunal granted permission and thus the matter
came before me for an error of law hearing.

The appellant brought two main heads of challenge to the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal.  Firstly, the appellant maintained that the assessment
of credibility was in error. The judge had failed to properly take into
account during the assessment of credibility the fact of the appellant's
age of 13 or 14 years old at the time of the events that he described and
his being only 16 years' old when he absconded in 2009. The judge made a
material error of fact regarding the date on one of the appellant's
documents from Afghanistan. The appellant's second ground maintained that
the First-tier Tribunal took an incorrect approach to the psychiatric
report prepared by Dr Galappathie dated 13 July 2020.  The appellant
maintained that the First-tier Tribunal Judge assessed credibility and
reached an adverse conclusion on the claim before considering the expert
report of Dr Galappathie and failed to deal with the clearly stated
professional opinion that the appellant was not feigning or exaggerating
his mental health symptoms.

Before me, Ms Everett conceded that all of the appellant's grounds had
merit such that the decision had to be set aside and remade de novo.  Where
Ms Everett's concession was in line with my preliminary view of the case, I
proceeded to find an error on a point of law and set aside the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal.

Where there are no extant findings of fact on the material issues and
nothing preserved, it is appropriate for the case to be remitted to the
First-tier Tribunal to be remade de novo in line with paragraph 7 of Part 3
of the Senior President's Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on a point of
law and is set aside to be remade de novo by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed: S Pitt                                   Date: 2 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

