
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12616/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 September 2019                  |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     EK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aitken
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 24 May 2019, I found that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent is the appellant, as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1980  and  is  a
         male citizen of  Cameroon.  On  8  June  2009,  the  appellant  was
         sentenced  to  18  months  imprisonment  for  obtaining   pecuniary
         advantage by deception and making false  representations  for  gain
         and money laundering. The appellant had, over  a  period  of  time,
         abused his position as a ticket barrier officer for Virgin Rail  to
         steal �15,000 using  credit  cards  taken  from  passengers.  By  a
         decision dated 24 January 2011, the appellant was informed that  he
         was subject to deportation as a  foreign  criminal  and  his  human
         rights and protection claims were refused. He appealed against that
         decision but his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on
         25 May 2011. He became appeals rights exhausted on 7 June 2011.  On
         12 May 2012, he submitted an application for leave to remain as the
         spouse of a settled person. That application  was  refused  by  the
         Secretary of State on  11  October  2018.  The  appellant  appealed
         against that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 21 March 2019, allowed the appeal on  human
         rights grounds (Article 8). The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,
         with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   In the grounds of appeal, the Secretary of State  acknowledges
         that the appellant may rely upon paragraph 399(a)  of  HC  395  (as
         amended):

             '(a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported;'

         The Secretary of State does not dispute that would be unduly  harsh
         for the appellant's British children to  be  expected  to  move  to
         Cameroon. However, he argues that it has 'not  been  shown  to  the
         required level' that it would be unduly harsh for the  children  to
         remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant. In essence, the
         grounds challenge the judge's analysis  as  regards  the  issue  of
         delay and that issue was the sole focus  of  the  oral  submissions
         made to me at the initial hearing by both representatives.

         3.   The judge made it clear in his decision [54] that, but for the
         delay on the part of the Secretary  of  State,  'deportation  would
         have been unavoidable.' It was delay alone,  therefore,  which  led
         the judge to conclude that the deportation of the appellant, whilst
         his minor children remained in the United Kingdom,  would  have  an
         effect upon them which would be unduly harsh.

         4.   The judge has produced cogent and detailed analysis.  He  has,
         however, in my opinion, fallen into error. At [46], he writes, in a
         passage in part quoting verbatim from the opinion of the  House  of
         Lords in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41, as follows:

             "It is hard to overstate the drip, drip effect of such  delay.
             At any time, when reporting to the police, he could have  been
             detained again for deportation. It appears to be a power  line
             case of the type referred to by the House  of  Lords  -  where
             months pass and months become years and years succeeds year so
             that the sense of impermanence fades and the expectation grows
             that the  authorities  do  not  intend  to  remove  him.  That
             expectation will have grown in his wife to,  and  in  the  two
             children. The shadow of deportation will have faded. In  those
             circumstances, to now insist on his  removal,  having  allowed
             hopes to grow  in  this  way,  does  involve  some  additional
             hardship,  beyond   that   necessarily   involved   by   their
             separation."

         5.   Here, the judge  relies  heavily  upon  EB  at  [15].  I  have
         emphasised in the quotation set out below  passages  of  particular
         relevance:

             "Delay may be relevant in a  second,  less  obvious,  way.  An
             immigrant without leave to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
             precarious situation, liable to be removed at  any  time.  Any
             relationship into which such an applicant enters is likely  to
             be, initially, tentative, being entered into under the  shadow
             of severance by administrative order. This is  the  more  true
             where the other party to the  relationship  is  aware  of  the
             applicant's precarious position.  This  has  been  treated  as
             relevant to the quality of the relationship. Thus in R  (Ajoh)
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  EWCA  Civ
             655, para 11, it was noted that "It was reasonable  to  expect
             that both [the applicant] and her husband would  be  aware  of
             her  precarious  immigration  status".   This   reflects   the
             Strasbourg  court's  listing  of  factors  relevant   to   the
             proportionality of removing an immigrant convicted  of  crime:
             "whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time when he
             or she entered into  a  family  relationship"  see  Boultif  v
             Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR  50,  para  48;  Mokrani  v  France
             (2003) 40 EHRR 123, para 30. A relationship  so  entered  into
             may well be imbued with a sense of impermanence. But if months
             pass without a decision  to  remove  being  made,  and  months
             become years, and year succeeds year, it  is  to  be  expected
             that this sense of impermanence will fade and the  expectation
             will grow that if the authorities had intended to  remove  the
             applicant they would have taken steps to do  so.  This  result
             depends on no legal doctrine but on an understanding  of  how,
             in  some  cases,  minds  may  work  and  it  may  affect   the
             proportionality of removal."

         6.   The difficulty is that, as the grounds point out, this is  not
         a case where months or years passed 'without a decision  to  remove
         being made' still less one any expectation should have arisen  that
         the authorities 'had they intended  to  remove  the  appellant  ...
         would have taken steps to do so.' The appellant was well aware that
         a deportation order had been made and also that the order  remained
         in force as it had not  been  revoked  or  cancelled  in  any  way.
         Moreover, as the First-tier Tribunal judge acknowledged  [45],  the
         period between the making of the deportation order in  the  hearing
         before him had not been one in which there had been no activity  in
         the appellant's case; the appellant had made further submissions in
         September 2013, February 2016, July 2016 in  September  2018.  Such
         submissions  are  not  consistent  with  the  suggestion  that  the
         applicant genuinely believed that the  threat  of  deportation  had
         been lifted. I do not agree with the judge that delay in this  case
         can or should have allowed the appellant's 'hopes to grow' that  he
         would not be deported. It is clear from what the judge says at [46]
         that his misunderstanding  of  the  relevance  of  delay  in  these
         particular circumstances has led  him  incorrectly  to  assess  the
         extent of hardship relevant in the test which he had to apply. As a
         consequence, is analysis has been flawed by legal error.

         7.   I discussed with the representatives the best course of action
         should I find that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  required  to
         be set aside. I  have  considered  remaking  the  decision  on  the
         existing evidence but have concluded that the Upper Tribunal  would
         be assisted in remaking the decision if it  were  to  hear  further
         submissions and also updating evidence concerning  the  appellant's
         family life.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  21  March
         2019 is set aside. None of  the  findings  of  factual  stand.  The
         decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge
         Lane) at or following a resumed hearing at Field House on a date to
         be fixed. Both parties may adduce fresh evidence provided copies of
         any documentary evidence (including witness statements) are sent to
         the Upper Tribunal and to the other party  no  less  than  10  days
         prior to the resumed hearing."

 2. At the resumed hearing on 6 September 2019, the appellant and his  wife
    adopted their witness statements as evidence in chief.  They  were  not
    cross-examined. Having heard the submissions of both representatives, I
    reserved my decision.

 3. The issues in the appeal remain those which had been before the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The appellant appeals on human rights grounds (Article 8
    ECHR) against the decision to deport him  to  Cameroon  (no  protection
    appeal is pursued). Paragraph 399  (a)  of  HC  395  (as  amended)  and
    Section 117C of  the  2002  Act  (as  amended)  both  apply.  With  the
    exception of sub-section 117B(6), the general considerations applicable
    in all cases and relating to the public interest contained  in  section
    117 are also relevant. I have had regard to section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the best interests of the  two
    children as a primary consideration. Neither  party  suggests  that  it
    would be reasonable for the British children of the appellant (aged  10
    years and six years respectively) to accompany him to live in Cameroon.
    The only issue is whether it would be unduly harsh for children and the
    appellant's wife to be separated from him by deportation.

 4. The evidence given by the appellant and his wife is not  controversial.
    There are two  fresh  items  of  evidence  adduced  since  the  initial
    hearing: a letter from Sacred Heart Catholic Primary  School  dated  18
    July 2019 and an independent  social  worker  report  (Dawn  Griffiths)
    dated 26 June  2019.  Both  the  letter  and  report  express  concerns
    regarding the  elder  child,  L,  who  has  now  been  told  about  the
    precarious nature of her father's continued  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The  school  letter  describes  L  as  'very  emotional'  when
    speaking of her life without a father. It is clear from  this  evidence
    also that L is sufficiently mature to appreciate that  her  mother  may
    struggle to care for the family alone in the absence of the  appellant.
    The social worker report refers to 'emotional changes'  in  L  and  the
    risks which the siblings may face  if  the  negative  effect  of  their
    father's deportation were to lead them to suffer  social  exclusion  at
    school.

 5. The familiar guidance set out in  MK  (section  55  -Tribunal  options)
    Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 has, in turn, been approved in the Supreme
    Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53:

         "27. Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh"  in
         this context was given by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J President
         and UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015]  INLR  563,  para
         46, a decision given  on  15  April  2015.  They  referred  to  the
         "evaluative assessment" required of the tribunal:

             "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly  harsh'
             does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,  undesirable
             or merely difficult. Rather,  it  poses  a  considerably  more
             elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this context, denotes something
             severe,  or  bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or
             comfortable. Furthermore, the addition of the adverb  'unduly'
             raises an already elevated standard still higher."

         On the facts of that particular case, the Upper Tribunal held  that
         the test was satisfied:

             "Approached in this way, we have no hesitation  in  concluding
             that it would be unduly harsh for either of the two seven year
             old British citizen children concerned to be abruptly uprooted
             from their United  Kingdom  life  setting  and  lifestyle  and
             exiled to this struggling, impoverished  and  plague  stricken
             west African state. No reasonable  or  right  thinking  person
             would consider this anything less that cruel."

         This view was based simply on the wording of the subsection and did
         not apparently depend on any view of the relative severity  of  the
         particular offence. I do not understand the conclusion on the facts
         of that case to be controversial.

 6. The  appellant's  wife  and  children  are,  as  noted  above,  British
    citizens. The  appellant  and  sponsor  married  in  November  2004.  I
    acknowledge that the appellant and his wife are parties to  a  marriage
    of considerable duration. The appellant entered the United Kingdom 2003
    as an  asylum  seeker  although  his  application  was  refused  and  a
    subsequent appeal dismissed. His criminal offending led to  a  sentence
    of 18  months  imprisonment  in  June  2009.  I  acknowledge  that  the
    appellant's offending is at the lower end of seriousness and, whilst it
    did not involve violence or drugs did involve dishonesty and deception.
    The appellant does not appear to have  had  any  legal  status  in  the
    United Kingdom other than by way of section 3C leave throughout much of
    his marriage. He made an application in May 2012 for leave to remain as
    the spouse of United Kingdom citizen and I am aware of  the  fact  that
    this application was not decided  until  October  2018.  I  acknowledge
    that, throughout considerable periods of the  marriage,  the  appellant
    was either engaged in appealing unfavourable decisions  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal or waiting for an application to  the  respondent  to  be
    processed.

 7. Turning to the position of the children, I am  in  no  doubt  that  the
    removal of their father from the family  home  will  cause  significant
    emotional pain and, at least in the short  term,  disruption  to  their
    education because they will be distressed. I note that L  is  receiving
    weekly counselling sessions at her school in order  to  enable  her  to
    'cope with her emotions.' However, the fact that L has  reacted  poorly
    to news of her father's possible removal is neither surprising  nor  is
    it an effect of the appellant's possible deportation  which  is  either
    surprising or out of the ordinary in terms of its severity. I  consider
    it very likely that any child of L's age being told that her father may
    be removed from the family home would react in a similar  way;  such  a
    reaction  may  perhaps  properly  be  described  as  a   'duly'   harsh
    consequence of any deportation.

 8. Beyond recording the effect of the news  of  her  father's  deportation
    upon L, the independent social worker report  otherwise  descends  into
    generalisations and an account of the  possible,  rather  than  likely,
    future effects upon L. Such effects  are  not  to  be  discounted  but,
    understandably, the author of the report is not in a position to  offer
    a 'prognosis' of L's emotional reactions as there  is  little  existing
    evidence of how she may, in fact, react in the medium to longer term. I
    am sure that children who suffer the negative  effects  of  a  parent's
    deportation may be at risk of social exclusion if they are not engaging
    at school, as Ms Griffiths states at 18.9, but this does not mean  that
    such  a  consequence  is  likely  to  occur  in  L's  case.  With  some
    hesitation, therefore, I am unable to say that the evidence before  the
    tribunal indicates, on a balance of probabilities, that the  effect  of
    the appellant's deportation upon L or upon  the  other  child,  E,  can
    properly be described as unduly harsh. In reaching that  conclusion,  I
    stress that it is important that the tribunal seeks to  apply  relevant
    law to the evidence in the particular case before it; in most,  if  not
    all, cases the tribunal will feel much sympathy for a child faced  with
    separation from a much-loved parent  but  sympathy  and  the  objective
    application of a test to the evidence are not  synonymous.  The  proper
    application of the principle of the  best  interests  of  the  children
    requires me to give significant weight to the  children's  relationship
    with the appellant but, for the reasons  I  have  stated  above,  I  am
    unable to conclude that the  consequences  of  deportation  would  have
    effects upon the children which will be unduly harsh.

 9. The appellant also asserts that the effects of his deportation upon his
    wife would also be unduly harsh. I accept  that  the  couple  are  been
    married for 15 years  and  that  they  have  a  close  relationship.  I
    acknowledge that the sponsor may be awaiting an echocardiogram and  may
    be suffering from asthma.  I  am  aware  that  she  takes  tablets  for
    anaemia. I also have no doubt that the prospect of a husband's  removal
    is causing her anxiety and stress and that  part  of  that  stress  may
    relate to the fact that she is the sole breadwinner at the family  home
    from her  work  as  an  assistant  nursing  practitioner;  without  the
    appellant to help care for the children, her ability to  discharge  the
    duties  of  that  work  may  be  diminished.  However,  these  are  all
    consequences which are very likely to arise  in  many  cases  involving
    deportation  of  a  spouse.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  effects  of
    deportation upon the appellant's wife will be  harsh;  I  am,  however,
    unable to conclude on the evidence that those effects  go  beyond  that
    and may be described properly as unduly harsh.

10. In the circumstances, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection  and
human rights claim following the making of a deportation order is  dismissed
on all grounds.


Signed                              Date 6 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

