
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12447/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Conference On 10 & 16 February 2021  |On 17 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                    M I M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms B. Asanovic, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  07  November
    2017 to refuse a protection and human rights claim in  the  context  of
    deportation proceedings and  to  certify  the  protection  claim  under
    section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ('NIAA
    2002').

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach ('the judge') dismissed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 10 December 2019. The  judge  concluded  that
    the appellant had rebutted the presumption that he was a danger to  the
    community for the purpose of section 72 NIAA 2002. She  heard  evidence
    from the appellant, his mother and his brother, but did not accept  the
    credibility of his claim to identify as bisexual. Nor  did  she  accept
    that the appellant would be at risk on  return  as  a  result  of  past
    involvement in a fraternity. She dismissed  the  protection  and  human
    rights claim. The appellant did not rely on Article 8  issues  relating
    to his family life even though he has a partner and children in the UK.

3.   In a decision promulgated on 20  November  2020  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Bruce found that the First-tier Tribunal's  findings  relating  to  the
    appellant's sexual orientation involved the making of an error of  law.
    However, she concluded that the First-tier Tribunal's findings relating
    to risk on return as a result of his past membership  of  a  fraternity
    were sustainable. She set aside the relevant  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and directed that the Upper Tribunal would remake the
    decision at a resumed hearing.  The  respondent  accept  that,  if  the
    appellant is bisexual, that he would be at risk on return. Accordingly,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce found that the only issue for  remaking  was
    whether the appellant is likely to be bisexual.

Background

4.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who entered the UK on 28  January
    2011 with entry clearance as a Tier 4 (Student) that was valid until 31
    October 2012 to study for an MSc in International  Business  Management
    at the University of East London.

Criminal conviction (2012)

5.   Within a few months of his arrival in the  UK  the  appellant,  with  a
    group of others, was involved in the widespread  public  disorder  that
    took place in August 2011. On 09 February 2012 he was  sentenced  to  3
    years' imprisonment for the attempted  burglary  of  a  jewellers.  The
    sentencing judge took  into  account  the  fact  that  the  group  went
    prepared to commit the offence. They travelled some distance  to  their
    target, had loaded rocks and bricks into the car, and had dark clothing
     with them including gloves and balaclavas. If it was not for the  fact
    that the premises had reinforced glass, the judge had no doubt that the
    group would have 'looted them thoroughly'.

First decision (2013)

6.   The appellant  was  notified  of  his  liability  to  deportion  on  28
    February 2012 and was asked to complete a questionnaire giving  reasons
    why he should not be deported. A previous First-tier Tribunal  decision
    from 2013 records that the appellant failed to respond to  the  initial
    questionnaire.

7.   The appellant was in a relationship with a  female  Nigerian  national,
    'SA', at the time. Their son, 'A', was born on 16 April 2012 while  the
    appellant was serving his sentence. The respondent's chronology  states
    that the appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    immigration rules on 28 September 2012. It is unclear on what basis the
    application was made.

8.   The 2013 First-tier Tribunal decision records that  the  appellant  was
    served with  a  further  notice  of  liability  to  deportation  and  a
    questionnaire on 30  October  2012.  He  submitted  a  response  on  09
    November 2012. The respondent signed a deportation order with reference
    to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 ('UKBA  2007')  on  02  May
    2013 and served it with a decision letter on 09 May 2013. The  decision
    attracted a right of appeal. The respondent's chronology indicates that
    two further applications for leave to remain  were  refused  without  a
    right of appeal.

First-tier Tribunal appeal (2013)

9.   A panel of the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davidson
    and Mr G.H. Getlevog) dismissed his appeal in a decision promulgated on
    25 September 2013. The appellant was unrepresented. He applied  for  an
    adjournment to obtain a legal  representative.  The  panel  noted  that
    there was evidence on file to show  that  the  appellant  had  a  legal
    representative who had recently withdrawn  because  they  were  without
    instructions. Having considered the relatively  straightforward  nature
    of the claim put forward by the appellant the panel decided  that  they
    could determine the appeal fairly  and  refused  the  application.  The
    appellant appeared at the  hearing  with  his  partner  SA.  The  panel
    considered the nature of the claim, which focussed solely on his family
    life with SA and their first child. At the hearing SA  said  that  they
    had been family friends since childhood. SA came to the UK in  2000  to
    study but had overstayed since 2008. At the date of the hearing SA  was
    on bail awaiting trial for attempting to smuggle a  mobile  phone  into
    the detention centre. She had only just been released from a three week
    period of custody during which the baby had been placed in the care  of
    the local authority. The panel accepted that the appellant had a family
    life with his partner and son. The First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that
    deportation was proportionate given the  appellant's  relatively  short
    length of residence in the UK, the fact that much of that time had been
    spent in prison, that neither the appellant nor his partner  had  leave
    to remain, and the young age of their child. The panel  concluded  that
    they could continue their family life in Nigeria. It seems  that  there
    was no application to  appeal  the  decision.  The  appellant's  appeal
    rights are said to have been exhausted on 07 October 2013.

Second decision (2014)

10.  The appellant made a protection claim on 26 August 2014. It is  unclear
    whether he approached the respondent to make the claim  or  whether  it
    was made  in  response  to  enforcement  action.  At  this  stage,  the
    appellant put forward a claim based on his identity as a bisexual  man.
    No mention was made of any fear on return because his former membership
    of  a  fraternity.  The  respondent  treated  the  application  as   an
    application to revoke the deportation order. The protection  claim  was
    refused in a decision dated 23 February 2015 with a  right  of  appeal.
    The respondent found that the delay in raising the  issue  damaged  the
    appellant's credibility and rejected his claim to be bisexual.

First-tier Tribunal appeal (2015)

11.  First-tier Tribunal Judge J.H.H.  Cooper  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 18 November 2015. The decision  indicates  that
    the First-tier Tribunal relisted the case on several occasions to allow
    for documents  to  be  submitted  and  for  witnesses  to  attend.  The
    appellant attended without a legal representative on 19 June  2015  and
    27 July 2015. On the latter date he said that his partner, who  he  had
    separated from at the end of 2014, had just give birth to their  second
    child on 20 July 2015. He did not  appear  at  the  subsequent  hearing
    listed on 16 October 2015. The judge considered the message relayed  to
    him from the court clerk, that the appellant had to go to hospital  and
    could not attend, took into account his previous failure to comply with
    directions, and  the  lack  of  evidence  to  support  the  adjournment
    application, before proceeding to determine the appeal in his  absence.
    The judge noted that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  produce  witness
    statements for himself or any of his  witnesses  as  directed.  In  the
    absence of any evidence to support the claim, or any explanation as  to
    why it was not raised in the previous appeal, the judge concluded  that
    the appellant had failed to show that he was  bisexual  as  claimed  or
    that he would be at risk on return. There was no new evidence  relating
    to the appellant's family life that might justify  departing  from  the
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal in 2013.

12.  The respondent's chronology states that the appellant's  appeal  rights
    were exhausted on 07 December 2015, which indicates  that  he  did  not
    apply for permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal decision
    despite the judge's decision to proceed in his absence.

Further submissions (2016)

13.  The respondent's chronology indicates that the appellant  was  detained
    in February 2016 with a view to removal.  In  response,  the  appellant
    made further submissions on 06 May 2016, for the first time raising his
    claimed fear of return as a result of his membership of  a  fraternity.
    No copy of the further submissions appears to have been included in the
    evidence before the Upper Tribunal for me to ascertain  the  extent  to
    which the appellant continued to assert that he was at risk because  of
    his sexual orientation. The respondent's bundle contains evidence  that
    was said to have been sent with the further submissions, all  of  which
    relates to the issue of risk arising  from  the  fraternity.  There  is
    nothing to suggest that the  appellant  put  forward  further  evidence
    relating to his claimed sexual orientation with the further submissions
    made in 2016.

14.  The chronology details a number  of  incidents  during  2016  and  2017
    whereby it is said that the  appellant  failed  to  attend  interviews,
    failed to comply with bail conditions, and was arrested in relation  to
    a suspected criminal offence relating to his former partner albeit  the
    charges later were dropped.

15.  The respondent refused the  further  protection  claim  in  a  decision
    dated 10 May 2017 and certified the claim as 'clearly unfounded'  under
    section 94(1) NIAA 2002. The appellant sought to challenge the decision
    by way of an application for judicial review. The claim was settled  by
    consent on 16 August 2017 and the respondent agreed to  reconsider  the
    further submissions.

Third decision (2017)

16.  After interviewing the appellant for  a  second  time,  the  respondent
    refused the fresh protection and human rights claim in a decision dated
    07  November  2017.  The  interview  record  and  the  decision  letter
    concentrated on the issues relating to  the  fraternity,  save  for  an
    oblique reference to his sexual orientation made  by  the  interviewing
    officer at the end of the interview. In response,  the  appellant  said
    that he joined  the  fraternity  'because  of  the  bullying  about  my
    sexuality'. The decision is the subject of this  appeal  and  is  being
    remade on the narrow ground identified above.

The Hearing

17.  The hearing took place at Field House with the  parties  and  witnesses
    appearing by video conference on Skype due to  the  continued  need  to
    take precautions to  prevent  the  spread  of  Covid  19.  The  parties
    consented to the hearing proceeding in  this  way.  The  situation  was
    reviewed throughout  the  hearing.  Two  witnesses  were  due  to  give
    evidence by Skype from Nigeria in any event. Having not  been  able  to
    establish a good enough connection with the appellant's brother on  the
    first day of the hearing, it was adjourned part-heard and his  evidence
    was taken  on  a  second  day.  None  of  the  witnesses  required  the
    assistance of an interpreter. I was satisfied that the  witnesses  were
    able to understand the questions put  to  them  and  could  communicate
    their answers clearly. Similarly, the legal representatives  were  able
    to put forward their submissions without  any  significant  impairment.
    The detail of the oral evidence and submissions is a matter for record.
    I will refer to the relevant aspects in my findings.

Decision and reasons

18.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper is the starting  point
    in this assessment, but given that the appellant  did  not  attend  the
    hearing or produce any evidence in support of the  previous  appeal  my
    task is to assess the evidence currently before the Upper Tribunal.

19.  The appellant's account of his sexual orientation given  in  interview,
    his witness statement, and when answering questions at the hearing, has
    been broadly consistent. His description of  attitudes  towards  people
    whose sexual orientation does not conform to Nigerian societal norms is
    also consistent with the background evidence.

20.  However, his account has been limited to a fairly narrow  and  specific
    set of incidents, some of which are repeated  by  other  witnesses.  In
    interview, and in his witness statement, the appellant described how he
    began to realise that he might be attracted to men when he was about 14
    years old. He described an incident when he was dared to kiss a boy  at
    a birthday party and realised that he quite  liked  it.  A  few  months
    later he told his mother about his feelings. She arranged for a  junior
    pastor in their church to say deliverance prayers for him. When he  was
    about 15 years old he became friends with an older boy called 'OO'  who
    people suspected might be gay. Their  friendship  eventually  developed
    into a sexual relationship. Their relationship ended about  six  months
    later when OO's family moved away.  The  appellant  said  that  he  was
    bullied at university because people thought he  was  gay  and  on  one
    occasion was beaten by a group of 5 men. The appellant  also  described
    an incident when his younger brother, 'P', was about 15 years old.  His
    brother jokingly asked him if he was gay and he confirmed that  he  did
    like men.

21.  In her statement, the appellant's mother touched on some  of  the  same
    elements described by the appellant. She said that he came to  see  her
    when he was 14 years old and told her that was attracted to members  of
    the same sex. It was against everything they preached so  she  arranged
    for a pastor at their church to  carry  out  deliverance  prayers.  His
    mother said that she was called to his secondary school because her son
    was the victim of 'several bullying incidents', but her statement  does
    not go so far as to suggest that she had any knowledge of  the  reasons
    for the bullying. She simply stated that her son  would  not  tell  her
    about it. She confirmed that he was friends with an  older  boy  called
    OO, but again, did not go so  far  as  to  suggest  that  she  had  any
    knowledge of them being in an intimate relationship. She merely  stated
    that her husband 'found it suspicious' that they  spent  so  much  time
    together and frowned upon  them  spending  time  in  their  house.  The
    appellant's mother also recited an incident when he was  at  university
    when she witnessed him with a head injury. She said that he was evasive
    and told her he had fallen, but she later found out from  a  friend  of
    his that he had joined a fraternity 'for his  self-protection'.  Again,
    there is no suggestion in her statement that she was aware  of  why  he
    was being bullied at university. In oral evidence she said that she had
    suspicions as to why he might have been bullied  and  prayed  for  him.
    When asked whether other people in their home area knew about her son's
    sexual orientation she mentioned talking to her sisters at her nephew's
    wedding, an incident mentioned in his brother's statement, but did  not
    offer any other examples.  She  confirmed  that  she  met  SA  and  the
    children when she visited the UK, but was unaware of any other partners
    that the appellant might have had either in Nigeria or the UK.

22.  In his statement, the appellant's brother P said that he had  begun  to
    hear rumours about his brother's sexual orientation when he  was  about
    10 years old and his brother was about 15 years old. People were saying
    that he might have been involved with a boy at boarding school, but  he
    did not describe any knowledge of a potential relationship beyond  that
    vague rumour. He said that he did not pay any attention to  it  at  the
    time. He went on to say that when he  was  'about  15  years  old'  his
    brother told him that he liked men. At the time  he  did  not  take  it
    seriously and did not understand what it meant. He said  that  sometime
    around '2013-2014' he met up with a family friend  who  had  just  come
    back from the UK. He told P that the appellant had taken him out  to  a
    gay bar in London. P said that he was shocked and disappointed  because
    he realised that the rumours that he heard might be true. He  rang  his
    brother who confirmed that it was true and said that it was up  to  him
    how he wanted to live his life. P has not seen his family  friend  much
    since then. The last time he saw him was  several  years  ago  when  he
    bumped into him at the airport. P also described an  incident  in  2016
    when he walked  in  on  his  mother  discussing  his  brother's  sexual
    orientation at his cousin's wedding. He thought  it  was  his  mother's
    sister who lives in Manchester who brought up  the  conversation  about
    his brother's lifestyle. The appellant's brother  made  clear  that  he
    disapproved of his lifestyle. They never talk about it. If his  brother
    returned to Nigeria he would be afraid to be associated with him.

23.  In evidence at the hearing his brother  P  ensured  that  he  mentioned
    each of these incidents even when he was not asked directly about them.
    When asked how old he was when their family friend came back  from  the
    UK, he did not answer the  question  but  repeated  the  dates  in  his
    witness statement i.e. 2013-2014. Without  prompting,  he  went  on  to
    refer to the incident when his brother told him that he liked guys  but
    he thought it was a joke.

24.  The appellant claimed that he and his partner SA  had  reconciled,  but
    that she had been advised by  her  legal  representative  not  to  give
    evidence at the hearing. In a witness statement signed  on  28  October
    2019 she did not say whether they were then in a  ongoing  relationship
    or not. Her statement touched on some of the same core elements of  the
    appellant's account as the other witnesses. SA said that she had  known
    the appellant all her life. She described them 'dating'  when  she  was
    about 12-13 years old but said that it was all innocent. She comes from
    a strict religious family. Her parents  were  against  her  associating
    with the appellant. Although they never told  her  why,  she  suspected
    that it might be because of  his  bisexuality  and  membership  of  the
    fraternity. She thinks her parents might have come to know  about  this
    because they were lecturers at  the  university.  SA  claims  that  she
    'sensed' that the appellant was bisexual although he did not tell  her.
    She knew OO and his family. She does not say when  she  questioned  the
    appellant about it, whether it was in Nigeria or far more recently, but
    the way her statement is drafted suggests that it may  have  been  more
    recently because she said that he admitted that he  had  been  involved
    with OO and told her that he had sex with another man while he  was  in
    detention in the UK. She went on to say:

         "[M] knew that him  getting  with  other  men  does  not  count  as
         cheating in my eyes and does not  compare  with  him  getting  with
         other women which I don't tolerate. He  is  allowed  to  see  other
         men."

25.  SA went on to say that she  heard  rumours  about  his  sexuality  from
    family and friends in Nigeria when she was pregnant  with  their  first
    child and even received a threatening email from someone  she  did  not
    know. Although I take into account the fact that this is said  to  have
    taken place in or around 2011, there is no copy of  the  email  or  any
    other evidence to support the claim.

26.  It is difficult to place much weight on this  evidence  without  having
    heard from SA. While I recognise that some relationships might be  that
    open and tolerant, it seems implausible  that  his  partner  would  not
    tolerate him having sex with other women but would tolerate him  having
    sex with men. At the very least, the reason  why  she  considered  that
    having sex with men 'does not count as cheating' is not  explained  and
    could not be  explored  any  further.  The  reasons  given  by  SA  for
    suspecting that he  may  have  been  bisexual  are  vague.  Without  an
    opportunity to assess her evidence in more detail, and to evaluate  her
    as a witness, I find that I can place little weight  on  her  assertion
    that the appellant is bisexual as claimed.

27.  There is further evidence from a witness who claims to know  about  his
    sexual orientation contained in a letter dated 18 May 2017 from a woman
    called 'TA' who said that they had recently started dating at the time.
    At the hearing the appellant confirmed that he lived  with  this  woman
    for a period of time. Although the exact dates are  unclear,  it  seems
    that this may have been  a  long  term  relationship  that  lasted  for
    several years before he reconciled with SA in 2019. The letter from  TA
    also describes the relationship in committed terms. She  said  that  he
    had become an integral part of her family with her son. She hoped  that
    they would develop a loving long-term relationship. The height  of  her
    evidence about his sexuality was as follows:

         "I am aware of his bisexuality and it is something I am  trying  to
         work through as no one is perfect and  I  also  have  experimented,
         however I feel it's something he cannot help."

28.  Again, I find that I can  place  little  weight  on  this  evidence  to
    support the appellant's claim to be bisexual. TA's evidence amounts  to
    no more than a bare statement and does not  contain  sufficient  detail
    for me to assess how she came to understand that  he  was  bisexual  or
    why, like SA, she might impliedly tolerate  him  having  sex  with  men
    while in what she considered to be a committed relationship.

29.  The final piece of witness  evidence  is  a  statement  from  a  friend
    called 'DE' who is a Nigerian national who I am told is also seeking to
    regularise his status in the UK. The  statement  is  dated  16  October
    2019. It is supported by a large number of documents relating  to  DE's
    own protection claim, indeed more of the documents in the bundle relate
    to him than the appellant. DE said that he first met the  appellant  in
    Highpoint prison. He noticed that the appellant  seemed  to  like  him.
    They met again when they were placed in immigration detention in  2016,
    where they shared a room.  He  did  not  say  how  long  they  were  in
    detention together, but states that they had sex while in the detention
    centre. DE said that after they were released he continued to live with
    his female partner and their children until the summer of 2018. DE said
    that he kept in contact with the appellant  after  they  were  released
    from detention and said  that  they  used  to  go  to  bars  and  clubs
    together. The evidence shows that DE is a vulnerable person who suffers
    from poor mental health. In his statement he described his relationship
    with the appellant as a strong friendship and only as an  'on  and  off
    sexual partner'. I accept that there may be good reason why DE  decided
    not to give evidence given his vulnerability, but it is  also  possible
    that he might want to avoid findings being made about  his  reliability
    as a witness if it might affect his own immigration case.

30.  The evidence shows  that  DE  was  likely  to  have  been  particularly
    vulnerable in detention. The appellant says that he  was  the  one  who
    initiated sex. It is plausible  that  a  person  might  have  sex  with
    someone of the same sex when detained in a single sex environment,  but
    in those circumstances it is not  necessarily  an  indicator  of  their
    underlying sexual orientation. Although I  accept  that  there  may  be
    genuine reasons why DE felt  unable  to  give  oral  evidence  in  this
    appeal, given the description of their continuing friendship after they
    were released from detention, no other evidence has  been  produced  to
    support the appellant's claim to have had an intimate relationship with
    DE. Their description of going out to bars and  clubs  contrasted  with
    the appellant's claim in oral evidence that he did  not  go  out  much.
    Even if they did meet up, there are no photographs of them out together
    or any evidence from mutual friends to support their claim to have been
    in an 'on and off' sexual relationship. The respondent submits that  DE
    equally has an incentive to claim that he is bisexual to resist removal
    to Nigeria. Although DE's  evidence  is  broadly  consistent  with  the
    appellant's central claim to be bisexual, it is difficult to place much
    weight on it in the absence of oral evidence or  any  other  contextual
    evidence to demonstrate an intimate relationship of the kind that might
    support the appellant's claim to be bisexual.

31.  Despite having  said  that  he  was  still  in  contact  with  OO  when
    interviewed about his protection claim in February 2015, the  appellant
    produced no evidence from him to support his claim to have  been  in  a
    relationship. In interview the appellant said that  OO  was  living  in
    Manchester. In his witness statement the appellant claimed that he  had
    not been in contact with OO since he moved  to  America  in  2014.  The
    appellant's evidence is that he has known OO since he was 15 years  old
    and was still in contact with him in early 2015 (a period of around  17
    years). The evidence indicates that the appellant comes  from  a  small
    university community where people know one another.  His  partner  also
    has connections with OO's family. It seems unlikely that the  appellant
    would lose contact with such  a  long  standing  friend  as  easily  as
    claimed given the ease of modern communication and the fact that he  is
    likely to have mutual friends and acquaintances who could put  them  in
    touch if need be. In the circumstances it would have been reasonable to
    expect the appellant to obtain some supporting evidence  from  OO.  The
    absence of such evidence is a notable omission given that, even on  his
    own evidence at interview, the appellant was still in contact  with  OO
    when he made the initial protection claim in August 2014.

32.  In interview the appellant said that all his friends  in  the  UK  knew
    about his sexual orientation, yet there no evidence from any  of  those
    friends or acquaintances. Having been given an opportunity  to  produce
    further evidence and relevant witnesses for the hearing in October 2015
    the appellant did  not  produce  any  witnesses  nor  even  attend  the
    hearing. When asked about the lack of evidence from  any  other  people
    who know him he told me that he did not like to discuss his immigration
    case  with  his  friends  and  many  of  them  were  busy  with   work.
    Nevertheless, when faced with deportation, and  having  failed  in  two
    previous appeals, it might be reasonable to  expect  the  appellant  to
    overcome his retiscence to obtain  supporting  evidence  from  a  wider
    range of sources.

33.  Whilst none of the witnesses who gave oral  evidence  were  subject  to
    probing cross-examination, nor was it put to them  directly  that  they
    might have provided an account to support the appellant with his  case,
    it was clear that the respondent did not accept the  appellant's  claim
    to be bisexual and by implication that their evidence was not accepted.
    Mr Bates submitted that both witnesses were close  family  members  who
    had an interest in assisting  the  appellant  and  that  little  weight
    should be placed on their evidence for this reason. Similarly,  SA  and
    DE also had an interest in supporting his claim. If the  appellant  was
    granted leave to remain it  might  benefit  SA  and  the  children  who
    continued to remain without  leave.  In  DE's  case  he  had  an  equal
    incentive to claim that he was bisexual to assist his  own  immigration
    case. He did not dispute that their  evidence  was  broadly  consistent
    with that of the appellant. However, he submitted  that  little  weight
    could be placed on the witnesses' evidence  when  they  either  had  an
    interest in helping the appellant or it might be in their own  interest
    to do so.

34.  I set out the background to this case in  some  detail  because  it  is
    important to assess the evidence  produced  by  the  appellant  in  the
    context of his immigration history. The delay in raising the issue is a
    factor that might weigh against the credibility  of  his  claim  to  be
    bisexual. I have taken into account what was said by the European Court
    of Justice about delayed disclosure in A, B, C v  Staatssecretaris  van
    Veiligheid en Justitie  (C/148/13).  I  also  bear  in  mind  that  the
    background evidence shows that cultural norms in  Nigeria  discriminate
    against and stimatise LGBT+ people. For this reason it is possible that
    a person might have some cultural barrier to  discussing  their  sexual
    orientation. But that does not seem to be the  explanation  offered  by
    the appellant. His evidence is that he has been open to friends in  the
    UK about his sexual  orientation  and  does  not  claim  to  have  been
    discreet. I find it difficult to believe that  he  did  not  understand
    that  he  could  raise  the  issue  when  he  was  sent  a  deportation
    questionnaire. It would have made clear that he must outlined  all  the
    reasons why he should not be deported. The  appellant  is  an  educated
    person who was able to make previous applications for a visa.  He  said
    that he did not raise the issue in the first appeal because he  thought
    he would succeed because of his family life.  His  further  explanation
    that  it  was  only  after  the  passing  of  the  Same  Sex   Marriage
    (Prohibition) Act 2013 in Nigeria that he felt at risk  is  also  weak.
    Even if the Act increased the penalties for same sex activity,  it  was
    illegal prior to the Act  and  societal  discrimination  against  LGBT+
    people was likely to have been just as widespread.

35.  Having belatedly raised the issue in  August  2014  the  appellant  was
    refused and had another opportunity to produce evidence of his  claimed
    sexual orientation in the second appeal. The explanation given  in  his
    witness statement as to why he did not attend the second  appeal  lacks
    credibility. The First-tier Tribunal decision indicates that he  failed
    to comply with  directions  to  produce  witness  statements,  to  call
    witnesses or to produce  any  other  evidence  to  support  his  appeal
    despite the fact that the hearing on 27 July  2015  was  adjourned  for
    that express purpose. The appellant explained that it was  a  difficult
    time because his daughter was born prematurely on 20 July 2015, but the
    hearing took place three months later on 16 October 2015. He would have
    been fully aware of the importance of the appeal. His failure to attend
    must be assessed in that context.

36.  His explanation as to why he did not attend the hearing contrasts  with
    the record made by the judge. In his witness  statement  the  appellant
    said that he was ill with pneumonia but did not see  a  GP  because  he
    thought he could not do so because he was an overstayer.  However,  the
    message relayed to the judge was that he could not  attend  because  he
    was on his way to hospital. In my assessment it is not  plausible  that
    he would think that he had no access to healthcare  when,  on  his  own
    evidence, his partner had recently given birth in hospital even  though
    she was an overstayer. If  the  appellant  genuinely  was  ill,  it  is
    reasonable to expect that he would have sought to appeal the First-tier
    Tribunal decision. Even if he did not have representation at the  time,
    he  is  an  educated  man  who  had  made  other  applications  without
    assistance. He was capable of reading the information that  would  have
    accompanied the First-tier Tribunal decision explaining how to make  an
    application for permission to appeal. He told me that he was ill for  a
    couple of weeks. The decision was promulgated a month after the hearing
    so on his own evidence he should have been well enough by that stage to
    consider his next step. There is no evidence to show that the appellant
    took  steps  to  challenge  the  decision,  instead,  he  made  further
    submissions on a different basis when the respondent began  to  prepare
    for his removal from the UK.

37.  Not  only  did  the  appellant  not  raise  the  issue  of  his  sexual
    orientation in the first appeal, but when he did finally raise  it,  he
    did not prepare for or seriously pursue the second appeal. Nor is there
    any evidence to show that he continued to pursue  the  issue  with  any
    vigour when he made further submissions to the respondent in 2016.

38.  The  appellant's  claim  is  broadly  consistent  with  the  background
    evidence of how LGBT+ people are treated in Nigeria.  He  has  produced
    some witness evidence that is generally supportive of his claim. He has
    given a broadly consistent account of the few specific elements that he
    relies on to demonstrate that he is bisexual as claimed. Between  them,
    his mother and brother have also mentioned the same key elements of his
    account. However, their evidence is part of a holistic assessment.

39.  When one steps back there is very little surrounding evidence  to  give
    his claim any depth  or  context.  The  witnesses  were  consistent  in
    repeating the limited set of elements contained in their statements but
    their oral evidence was lacking in natural context. I bear in mind that
    both his mother and brother are religious and that their beliefs  might
    make it difficult to discuss the issue. However, the impression that  I
    was left with after having heard their evidence was that there  was  no
    deviation from the few elements outlined in their  statements.  In  the
    case of his mother, she avoids any direct connection between  incidents
    of bullying  or  his  membership  of  the  fraternity  and  his  sexual
    orientation. In the case of his brother, he seemed keen to ensure  that
    he had mentioned every incident in his statement even when he  was  not
    asked about it. Whilst  the  witnesses  were  generally  consistent,  a
    natural discussion about his sexual identity was  somewhat  lacking.  I
    recognise that witnesses might prepare for a hearing by  ensuring  that
    they are familiar with their previous statements, but I was  left  with
    an impression that there may have been an element of rehearsal.

40.  I have already explained why the statements  made  by  other  witnesses
    who did not give evidence were limited in nature and could not be given
    significant weight.  None  of  the  people  who  he  says  he  has  had
    significant relationships with in the UK gave oral evidence.

41.  The tone of the appellant's evidence in the first asylum interview  was
    to suggest that he preferred men to women. He said that he had feelings
    for boys more than girls. He said that he suspected that he  was  'gay'
    when he was at school and repeated that he was 'gay' before saying that
    he would define himself as bisexual. His relationship history in the UK
    indicates that he has predominantly been  in  long  term  relationships
    with women. There is little or no evidence from friends or other people
    who are said to know about his sexual orientation to support his  claim
    to have been in intimate relationships  with  men.  I  accept  that  in
    conservative cultures people may feel pressured to conform to  societal
    norms, but the appellant says that he has felt free to express  himself
    in the UK. The evidence of his relationship  history  in  the  last  10
    years contrasts with the picture he sought to  portray  in  the  asylum
    interview.

42.  Assessing whether someone's thoughts and feelings  about  other  people
    are likely to be genuine is one of the most difficult areas of decision
    making for an immigration judge. It is rarely possible to come  to  any
    confident conclusions about a person's claimed sexual orientation.

43.  In assessing the evidence as a whole, I find that the  overall  picture
    shows that the appellant only sought to raise the issue of  his  sexual
    orientation at a late stage after an initial attempt to stay on grounds
    of his family life was unsuccessful. His history indicates a propensity
    to seek to delay hearings and to make further  applications  to  resist
    deportation on different grounds. Even if the appellant  was  reluctant
    to raise the issue until 2014 because of fear of  stigmatisation,  when
    he had an opportunity to produce  evidence  to  support  his  claim  he
    failed to pursue the appeal in 2015 in any meaningful way.

44.  The claim, in so far as it  goes,  has  been  expressed  in  a  broadly
    consistent way by each of the oral witnesses, but is limited to a suite
    of set incidents. The oral evidence given by the witnesses  lacked  the
    natural variations in expression that one might expect between  several
    witnesses. This gave the impression that they confined  their  evidence
    to the key elements contained in their statements. Whilst that evidence
    was broadly consistent, the witnesses may have an incentive  to  assist
    the appellant because of their close familial ties. The evidence  given
    by other witnesses solely in writing is limited in nature and could not
    be tested. There is a lack of  evidence  from  key  characters  in  his
    account such as OO and DE, which could reasonably have  been  produced.
    There is also a lack of surrounding evidence  from  other  friends  and
    acquaintances who are said to be aware of his sexual orientation.

45.  I bear in mind that there is a low  standard  of  proof.  Although  the
    appellant and his close family members have given a consistent  account
    of a specific set of events, when one steps back from those  statements
    to look at the evidence as a whole in the context  of  his  immigration
    history and his relationship history, there are a number of issues that
    undermine the credibility of his claim. For the reasons given  above  I
    find that the appellant  has  failed  to  produce  sufficient  reliable
    evidence to show that there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that
    he is bisexual as claimed or that he would be at  risk  on  return  for
    that reason.

46.  I conclude that the appellant does not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for one of the reasons identified in the Refugee Convention
    and that he would not be at risk on  return  under  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention. The appellant's  removal  in  consequence  of  the
    decision would not breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
    Refugee Convention and would not be unlawful under  section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.



DECISION

The appeal is DISMISSED on protection and human rights grounds


Signed   M. Canavan    Date  06 May 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email
