
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12446/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 March 2019                         |On 21 March 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    s b d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Head, Counsel, instructed by Cassadys
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Abebrese (the judge), promulgated on 27  December  2018,
    in which he dismissed her appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal  of
    her protection and human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Congo Brazzaville, had based her claim  on
    alleged connections between her father and a high profile individual in
    her  home  country  named  Pastor  Toumi.   This  individual   led   an
    organisation which was in opposition to the government of that country.
     As a result of what was said to be political opinion imputed  to  both
    the Appellant and her father, she asserted that she was  at  risk  from
    the authorities of her home  country.   The  Respondent  rejected  this
    claim for reasons set out in a decision letter dated 22 June 2018.




The judge's decision

 3. In brief summary the judge rejects the credibility of  the  Appellant's
    account, as a result of which he concludes that there would be no  risk
    on return.  I will deal with more specific  aspects  of  the  decision,
    below.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds are twofold.  First, it is said that the judge has  created
    confusion  by  referring  to  the  Appellant  as  a  national  of   the
    "Democratic Republic of Congo" as well as  making  references  to  "the
    Congo" and "Congo Brazzaville".  In his decision it is  said  that  the
    confusion is sufficient to raise doubts about whether anxious  scrutiny
    had indeed been applied to the Appellant's case.

 5. Second, it is said that the judge approached the Appellant's protection
    claim on an incorrect basis.  It is asserted that from [29],  [30]  and
    [32] it is apparent that the judge viewed her case as involving  actual
    political opinion and the need to show a political profile of one  sort
    or another.  This misapprehension of the Appellant's case was  material
    to the judge's overall assessment of credibility.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy  on
    18 January 2019.




The hearing before me

 7. Ms Head relied on  the  grounds.   She  submitted  that  the  confusion
    between the two countries  was,  to  say  the  least,  troubling.   The
    references to the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  were  made  in  two
    important paragraphs in the judge's decision, namely  the  introduction
    at [1] and the start of the findings of fact at [29].

 8. In respect of ground 2, Ms Head emphasised what the judge  himself  had
    said in [29], [30] and [32].  She did accept  that  the  Appellant  had
    needed to show a connection between her father and  Pastor  Toumi,  but
    that the judge had nonetheless approached the nature of this connection
    on an incorrect basis, namely actual political  involvement  with  this
    individual.

 9. For his part, Mr Bramble relied on the Respondent's rule  24  response.
    He submitted that the judge has simply made a slip  when  referring  to
    the Democratic Republic of Congo in [1] and [29] of his decision.  This
    was not material to the outcome.  In respect of  the  more  substantive
    challenge he suggested that when the decision  was  read  as  a  whole,
    including the negative findings that had not  been  challenged  in  the
    grounds,  the  judge's  overall  conclusions  were   sustainable.    He
    suggested that apart from the references to actual political opinion in
    [29], [30] and [32], all other findings related to the issue of imputed
    political opinion.

10. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.




Decision on error of law

11. This has not been an easy case to decide. After careful consideration I
    have concluded, by a relatively  narrow  margin,  that  the  judge  did
    commit material errors of law.  Specifically, I am  satisfied  that  he
    approached the Appellant's claim, at least to a material extent, on  an
    incorrect footing.

12. It is clear to me that the whole thrust of the case was that whilst her
    father had had interactions with Pastor Toumi, neither he (the  father)
    nor herself had ever had any actual political involvement  and  neither
    had belonged to any political movement as such.  The issue was  whether
    the authorities of Congo Brazzaville had perceived her father  and,  in
    consequence, herself as having such links as to place her at risk.

13. The reasons for my overall conclusion are as  follows.   First,  it  is
    right that at [5] the judge does refer in terms to  "imputed  political
    opinion". However, it is clear from that passage that  he  is  in  fact
    referring to what the Respondent had set out in the reasons for refusal
    letter.  This reference is not of itself sufficient to indicate that  a
    correct apprehension of the Appellant's claim was considered  when  the
    substantive findings and conclusions are set out later in the decision.

14. Second, in [29] and [30] the judge  clearly  states  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that either the Appellant or her father had been  politically
    active.  This is indicative of an erroneous approach to the  underlying
    basis of the Appellant's claim.  Having read and then re-read  [30],  I
    note that later on in that passage the judge states that:

         "I am also not  persuaded  by  the  evidence  before  me  that  the
         Appellant's father was assisting Pastor Toumi and the  Ninja  group
         because of the lack of evidence of the Appellant  or  her  family's
         political connection with any party in Congo."

15. This is further indication that he was in effect  finding  against  the
    Appellant's protection claim because he was not  satisfied  that  there
    was an actual political opinion/profile.

16. I then move on to [31].  This paragraph, like others,  does  involve  a
    number of particular issues within it, not all of which  are  connected
    to the particular question of whether there was  any  actual  political
    activity on the part of the father  or  the  Appellant.   However,  the
    first sentence is of some significance:

         "I do not find the core of the Appellant's evidence  regarding  the
         attack on the family home to be credible as  implicated  above  the
         Appellant has not provided sufficient evidence to indicate that the
         DGST  or  the  government  had  any  reason  to   attack/raid   the
         Appellant's family home."

17. On my reading this  indicates  another  link  between  a  rejection  of
    aspects of the Appellant's case in general and the judge's finding that
    there was no actual political  activity/profile  on  the  part  of  the
    Appellant's father (or indeed herself).

18. Moving on to [32], the first sentence reads as follows:

         "I also do not find the evidence of the Appellant credible for  the
         main reason that she has no political profile in Congo and she  has
         not provided credible evidence to suggest that the Appellant  could
         have provided the DGST with information that could  not  have  been
         obtained from any of the people from  her  family  who  were  being
         detained."

                                                            (emphasis added)

19. I take on board Mr  Bramble's  emphasis  on  the  second  part  of  the
    sentence just quoted and the fact that the  judge's  decision  must  be
    read sensibly and holistically.  Having done so, there is still  in  my
    judgment the inescapable probability that at least part of  that  "main
    reason"  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  the  previous
    conclusion that neither she nor her father  in  fact  had  a  political
    profile in Congo Brazzaville.  Therefore, once again there is a  common
    thread  relating  to  a  misapprehension  as  to  the  nature  of   the
    Appellant's claim.

20. Having set out these points, I make it very clear that I have read  the
    judge's decision in its entirety and I very much have in mind the  fact
    that there are numerous adverse credibility findings  set  out  between
    [30] and [39].   A  large  number  of  these  have  not  in  fact  been
    challenged by the Appellant, at least not expressly.  Seen in isolation
    many if not most of these additional findings were open to the judge.

21. However, whilst in some cases  it  is  possible  to  excise  errors  on
    particular matters from the findings and conclusions as a whole with no
    material impact on the outcome, that is not the case in the Appellant's
    appeal.  In my view the erroneous approach to the essential  nature  of
    the Appellant's claim,  as  I  have  identified  above,  leads  to  the
    distinct possibility (if not a probability) of an infection of all  the
    findings and conclusions.   As  a  consequence,  and  as  I  have  said
    previously, by a relatively narrow margin, the judge's  decision  as  a
    whole in unsafe.

22. On the basis of the above I set the judge's decision aside.

23. For the sake of  completeness,  I  address  briefly  the  first  ground
    relating  to  the  confusion  between  the  Appellant's  countries   of
    nationality.  It is a fact that she is and always has been  a  national
    of Congo Brazzaville.  It is unfortunate that  the  judge  had  created
    uncertainty by his reference to the Democratic Republic of Congo in [1]
    and [29].  One can see  that  the  Appellant  would  be  worried  about
    whether the judge had in fact applied his mind properly to the  correct
    country of origin.  However, reading the decision as a whole and having
    regard to the Appellant's skeleton  argument  and  background  evidence
    placed before the judge,  I  am  satisfied  that  these  two  erroneous
    references were essentially a slip and nothing of substance.  There are
    numerous references to "Congo" and this  can  be  contrasted  with  the
    specific  references  to  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  in  the
    paragraphs already cited.  The distinction suggests, on  balance,  that
    the judge did indeed have the correct country of origin  in  mind  when
    making his decision.  There is no material error here.




Disposal

24. It is quite clear that this appeal must be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a complete rehearing with no findings of  fact  preserved.
    This  is  entirely  consistent  with  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statement and both representatives were agreed that were I to  set  the
    judge's decision aside remittal would  be  the  appropriate  course  of
    action.




Notice of Decision

The judge's decision contains a material error of law and I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  complete
         rehearing with no preserved findings of fact;




      2. The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Abebrese.



Signed   [pic]                  Date: 18 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
