
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12555/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th July 2019                    |On 23rd July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                    r y a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert (instructed by B.H.T. Immigration Legal
Services)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the appellant in relation to
    a judgment of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach promulgated  on  2nd  May
    2019.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd born in 2001.  It was  accepted  by  the
    judge in the First-tier Tribunal that he is  extremely  vulnerable,  he
    has learning difficulties and the events that he claims took  place  in
    Iraq took place when he was a child.  The  judge,  given  his  learning
    difficulties and vulnerability agreed with the suggestion that  it  was
    inappropriate for him to give evidence and be cross-examined.  The case
    was then dealt with purely on submissions.  In the Decision and Reasons
    the judge made adverse credibility findings against the appellant based
    on plausibility issues which are, in my view, not sustainable.

 3. Mr Tufan on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
    determination was tainted by material errors of law  and  that  it  was
    appropriate for the Decision to be set aside in its  entirety  and  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier for a  full  rehearing  on  all
    issues.  The appropriate hearing centre is Taylor House.

 4. I understand also that there is a country guidance case on the issue of
    documentation for Iraqis that has been heard but  not  yet  promulgated
    and it will be appropriate if  this  case  was  listed  for  its  fresh
    hearing after that Decision has been promulgated and reported.

Notice of Decision

 5. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    Decision is set  aside  and  the  matter  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed [pic]                            Date 17 July 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


