

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA138262016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision promulgated                 |
|on 5 May 2017                         |on 17 May 2017                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     P W
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Bandegani instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Staunton - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        NMK Lawrence ('the Judge'), promulgated on  10  February  2017,  in
        which the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
        refusal of a grant of  international  protection  and/or  leave  to
        remain on human rights grounds.



Error of law


     2. The appellant, a national of Botswana, who  claimed  to  have  been
        born on [ ] 1980, entered the United Kingdom on 13  September  2011
        lawfully with leave as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  to
        undertake a three-year course at Glamorgan University.
     3. The Judge considered an adjournment application which  is  referred
        to in the decision under challenge from  [7]  to  [17].  The  Judge
        noted an application for an adjournment made  on  the  21  December
        2016 having been refused at  the  prehearing  review  stage  on  30
        January 2017, nine days  before  the  substantive  hearing,  and  a
        second written adjournment being submitted on 10 January 2017  also
        being re-refused. The basis of the adjournments was to  enable  the
        applicant to (i) obtain an updated report  by  a  named  Consultant
        Clinical Psychologist, (ii)  to  compile  country  information  and
        (iii) to instruct a Dr Galvin of  the  University  of  Botswana  to
        prepare a Country Expert report.
     4. The appellant's representative before First-tier Tribunal Judge NMK
        Lawrence, Mr Neale, renewed the application orally to grounds being
        (i) to obtain a psychological  assessment  and  (ii)  to  obtain  a
        country expert report. It was accepted there was  report  from  the
        Helen Bamber Foundation relating to the  appellant's  psychological
        presentation and the reason for obtaining the additional report was
        said to relate to uncertainty regarding the  respondent's  position
        and it appearing highly likely that the respondent intended to test
        the appellant's evidence. In relation to the country expert  report
        Mr Neale submitted the report was required on the risk of rape  and
        threats from drug dealers in Botswana.
     5. The Judge's reasoning for refusing  the  adjournment  request,  and
        comments upon the proceedings generally, are set out at [12] - [17]
        of the decision under challenge in the following terms:


         "12.  In considering the  application,  I  took  into  account  the
             aforementioned letters from Duncan Lewis, "Adj Doc"  and  oral
             submissions by both representatives. I note that, in so far as
             the country report is concerned, the appellant first mentioned
             fears of drug gangs in her asylum interview (see:q71). I  also
             note that at every outset of the interview, the appellant  was
             asked if she  has  any  documents  she  wished  to  rely.  The
             appellant said she wishes  to  submit  'objective  information
             which deals 'FGM and the  corruption  in  Botswana  and  about
             criminals who get away with what they have  done'  (see:q2  of
             AIR). These are the matters for which a report is now  sought.
             The interview took place  on  21  August  2014.  Duncan  Lewis
             represented the appellant at that time. They have  had  copies
             of the transcript of  the  interview.  It  seems  to  me,  the
             appellant and more particularly Duncan Lewis, were on  notice,
             since 21 August 2014, that drug gangs and  corruption  are  an
             issue for the appellant.


         13.  I note that Duncan Lewis practice in the  asylum  field  on  a
             regular basis, in the London area and in the Midlands.  It  is
             not credible that it did not occur to  them,  soon  after  the
             asylum interview, to instruct a country expert, if  a  country
             expert report were deemed, according to them, necessary.  They
             have had two years to address the issue. The  Judicial  Review
             only came to the fore in  and  around  August/September  2016.
             There is no explanation for not being active,  either  by  the
             appellant or by Duncan Lewis, on this issue  since  21  August
             2014. Accordingly, I refuse the application to adjourn.


         14.  In respect  of  the  further  psychological  report  there  is
             already a report. Insofar as any concern  Duncan  Lewis  might
             have,  about  the  respondent  challenging   the   appellant's
             credibility at the hearing, again, I find  Duncan  Lewis  have
             had plenty of time to obtain another  report  to  bolster  the
             report from Helen Bamber Foundation. Accordingly, I refuse  to
             grant the application for an adjournment.


         15.  Duncan Lewis did not submit  any  bundles  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant for the hearing. I noticed Mr Neale had a bundle. He
             informed me he had been provided with a bundle  on  behalf  of
             the appellant. I asked him if  the  bundle  contains  all  the
             material he wishes to rely on. He confirmed it does.  I  asked
             him if I could make two copies. I made a copy for  myself  and
             one for Mr Henry. The hearing was adjourned to be heard  at  2
             PM so that Mr Henry and I could  have  time  to  consider  the
             bundle (a week later I received a bundle  from  Duncan  Lewis;
             there was no need to have incurred this expenditure; Mr  Neale
             would have informed Duncan Lewis that I had already copies  of
             the bundle).


         16.  The appellant gave oral  evidence.  She  adopted  the  written
             evidence and her latest witness  statements.  She  was  cross-
             examined but not re-examined. I have recorded the  appellant's
             oral evidence in my Notes of Evidence. At  the  conclusion  of
             the  oral  evidence  I  heard  oral  submissions   from   both
             advocates. This is also recorded in my Notes of Evidence.


         17.  In determining this appeal  I  have  taken  into  account  the
             evidence contained in  the  respondent's  bundle  (hereinafter
             "Resp 1"), the evidence contained in  the  appellant's  bundle
             (hereinafter "App 1"), the documents submitted  on  behalf  of
             the appellant at  the  hearing,  the  oral  evidence  and  the
             submissions made on behalf of both parties."


     6. The way the Judge considered the adjournment request is  challenged
        in Grounds 1 and 2 of  the  appellants  Grounds  of  Appeal,  which
        assert:


        "Ground (1) fairness - failure to direct or apply legal test


         6.   The A made three written applications to adjourn in advance of
             the hearing, the last on 10 January 2017. At the hearing,  the
             FtT was "invited to adjourn the appeal to allow A's solicitors
             to obtain (a) a country expert report and (b) a  psychological
             report".


        7.   The need for at least a country expert  report  was  clear  in
             this case; to provide context in which to  assess  A's  claim,
             and in order to assess risk at the date of the hearing.  As  A
             noted in her  third  adjournment  application:  "There  is  no
             publicly  available  and  up-to-date   Home   Office   Country
             Information and Guidance on Botswana. The  material  cited  in
             the RFRL is not publicly available but is the  result  of  the
             Home Offices own request for information. The  material  cited
             dates to 2011. In our own research, we have found reports that
             date to 2012."


         8.   For the reasons given by the FtT (paras 7 to 14) it refused to
             grant  an  adjournment.  The  FtT  refused   the   adjournment
             primarily because the FtT considered A had enjoyed  sufficient
             time  to  prepare  for  her  appeal.  The  FtT  rejected   the
             application  without  considering,  at   any   time,   whether
             proceeding with the appeal would be  fair.  The  FtT  did  not
             refer to the applicable procedure rule or any authority or the
             word   "fair"   anywhere   in   its   determination:   Nwaigwe
             (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418.

        Ground (2): Failure to have regard to relevancies


        9.   Further to Ground (1), in refusing to adjourn the  FtT  failed
             to take into account a number of relevant considerations.  The
             FtT failed to take into account:  (a)  that  the  Respondent's
             decision to refuse and certify the claim  took  two  years  to
             make (2014 - 16); (b) that A could not reasonably be  expected
             to expend public money on the  production  of  bespoke  expert
             opinion prior to the SSHD's decision because (i) the Legal Aid
             Agency ("LAA") would not grant funding to get one, and/or (ii)
             the decision may have been positive; (c) once the decision was
             made, the A was not entitled to rely on post decision evidence
             (being judicial review proceedings) save in exceptions that do
             not apply; (d) to the LAA would not provide funding for expert
             opinions in advance of an appeal that depended upon the  final
             determination of the judicial review claim as  here;  (e)  the
             final determination of  the  judicial  review  claim  remained
             unknown until the day before the trial  on  30  November  2016
             2016 (the Respondent defended the claim until the  day  before
             the substantive hearing listed at the Upper Tribunal when  she
             accepted the claim was  not  manifestly  unfounded);  (f)  the
             appeal was listed on the same day that notice  of  appeal  was
             lodged (14.12.2016); (g) in between lodgement and the  hearing
             date, A's legal  representatives  office  was  closed  due  to
             Christmas and New Year, and; (h) A  had  11  working  days  to
             prepare the appeal and took all necessary steps  available  to
             her to secure the opinion evidence required.


        10.  Further to grounds one and two, the FtT's refusal to grant  an
             adjournment   without   regard,   or   enquiry   into    these
             considerations renders its refusal to  give  A  more  time  to
             secure an expert report unfair."


     7. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  on  this  ground  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal for the following reasons:


         "It is not arguable that the Tribunal deprived the appellant of her
         right to a fair hearing given the length of time that she had  been
         given to  prepare  for  it  and  the  existing  evidence  that  was
         available to support her appeal. The failure  of  the  Tribunal  to
         make express  reference  to  the  concept  of  'fairness'  was  not
         therefore arguably material to the objective  question  of  whether
         she in fact received a fair hearing. Given that it  is  clear  from
         paragraphs 11 and 12 of its decision that the Tribunal took account
         of all such  matters  as  Counsel  had  brought  to  its  attention
         concerning the reasons for delay in preparing for the appeal, it is
         not arguable that the Tribunal failed to have  regard  to  material
         matters in refusing the application to adjourn the hearing. Neither
         is it arguable that there was any substantive unfairness in failing
         to put to the appellant to the matters listed in the  third  ground
         absent any explanation that she may have had for them.  Whilst  the
         absence of reference to an event in an  MLR  does  not  necessarily
         mean that the appellant did not mention it to  the  author  of  the
         report, it does not follow from this that it was an arguable  error
         of law for the Tribunal to rely upon  the  absent  reference  given
         that (a) the burden was upon  the  appellant  to  substantiate  the
         truth of her claim by credible evidence, and (b) she had chosen  to
         rely upon the MLR  to  support  that  claim.  Finally,  it  is  not
         arguable that the tribunal made an error of  law  in  relying  upon
         Court of Appeal authority for  its  interpretation  of  the  phrase
         "very significant  obstacles"  given  that  this  test  is  equally
         applicable under paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules  (which
         the Tribunal applied to the appellant) and section 117D of the 2002
         Act (which, contrary to the assertion in the grounds, the  Tribunal
         did not apply to  her  case).  Neither  is  it  arguable  that  the
         Tribunal was required to consider factors under section 117B of the
         Act given its unchallenged finding that there was  no  evidence  of
         'compelling circumstances' such as to warrant consideration outside
         the Immigration Rules  [paragraph  41].  Permission  to  appeal  on
         grounds 1, 2, 3, and 6 is accordingly refused."


     8. Permission to appeal was granted on grounds 3 and 4.
     9. The appellant renewed the application for permission to  the  Upper
        Tribunal, following which permission was granted by Upper  Tribunal
        Judge Canavan in the following terms:


         "2.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted permission  to  appeal
             in relation to the issues raised in the appellant's fourth and
             fifth grounds of appeal but refused permission in relation  to
             the first two grounds (relating to fairness  issues  regarding
             an adjournment request) and  the  third  ground  (relating  to
             fairness issues regarding failure to put  credibility  matters
             to the appellant at the hearing).


        3.   Although the first two grounds do  not  particularise  in  any
             detail how or why an expert country report was likely to  have
             made any material difference to the  outcome  of  the  appeal,
             save to say that there is little background evidence available
             relating to Botswana, it is at least arguable that  the  judge
             only  concentrated  on   the   time   that   the   appellant's
             representative had to obtain the  report  without  considering
             whether  it  might  be  relevant  to   a   fair   and   proper
             determination of the appeal.


        4.   It is also arguable that the judge may have erred  in  failing
             to put concerns  regarding  apparent  inconsistencies  in  the
             appellant's account to the appellant  during  the  hearing  in
             circumstances where  those  issues  were  not  raised  in  the
             decision letter."


    10. Permission was therefore granted on all grounds.
    11. It is not a legal requirement for a judge  to  set  out  in  detail
        every decided authority of the Senior Courts or relevant  piece  of
        legislation, such that a  failure  to  do  so  will  amount  to  an
        arguable error of law. It is acceptable to assume that  the  Judge,
        who has considerable experience within the First-tier Tribunal,  is
        aware of the correct legal test that should have been in  his  mind
        when considering the merits of the adjournment application.
    12. It is also settled that the relevant issue is not  the  conduct  of
        the Judge per se. In Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
        00418 (IAC) it was held that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to  an
        adjournment  request,  such  decision  could,  in   principle,   be
        erroneous in law in several respects: these include  a  failure  to
        take  into  account   all   material   considerations;   permitting
        immaterial considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a
        fair hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
        irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases  the  question  will  be
        whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his right  to  a
        fair hearing.   Where  an  adjournment  refusal  is  challenged  on
        fairness grounds, it is important to recognise  that  the  question
        for the Upper Tribunal is not whether  the  FtT  acted  reasonably.
        Rather, the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there  any
        deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing
    13. In R (on the application of AM (Cameroon) v AIT 2007 EWCA  Civ  131
        the Court of Appeal said that  unfair  decisions  on  interlocutory
        matters, such as adjournments or the  admission  of  evidence,  can
        amount to errors of law.  Such decisions will have  to  be  grounds
        for arguing that they display  gross  procedural  unfairness  or  a
        complete denial of natural justice.  In that  case  that  Court  of
        Appeal thought that was the  case  because  the  judge  refused  to
        adjourn when the appellant was medically unfit  to  give  evidence;
        because he  listed  the  case  for  a  day  when  counsel  was  not
        available; and because he refused permission  for  evidence  to  be
        taken on the phone.
    14. The  alleged  procedural  unfairness  in  the  Judge  refusing  the
        adjournment request arose due to the  procedural  history  of  this
        matter. The Judge found that the appellant had had sufficient  time
        to prepare for her appeal but appears to give no  consideration  to
        the procedural history and how this impacted upon the ability of  a
        publicly funded individual to act in the manner  the  Judge  deemed
        appropriate.
    15. This is set out in detail in the renewed grounds of appeal,  Ground
        (2), set out above.
  16. There is no obvious consideration by the Judge in the decision of  the
      reality of this  matter  and  difficulties  facing  the  appellant  in
      relation to the procedural  history  which  provided  only  a  limited
      window of opportunity to enable  the  appellant  to  prepare  for  the
      appeal. As a protection appeal it is important that adequate time  was
      provided.
  17. In Al-Jedda v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 212 SIAC refused an application for
      an adjournment to obtain an expert's report on the  complex  issue  of
      statelessness from an Appellant whose  British  citizenship  had  been
      revoked.  The  Court  of  Appeal  said  this  was  wrong  in  law  and
      productive of procedural unfairness.  The procedural history indicated
      that the claimant had had difficulties getting an expert's  report  on
      this complex issue.   The  difficulty  was  not  attributable  to  him
      personally and the culpability of his representatives was minimal.
  18. Paragraph 8 of the Presidential Guidance Note number 1 of 2014  states
      that factors weighing in favour of an adjourning an appeal include (c)
      where further time  is  needed  because  of  the  delay  in  obtaining
      evidence which is outside the parties control, for example,  where  an
      expert witness fails to provide a report within the period expected.
  19. This is not a case of an individual's representative  failing  to  act
      with due diligence, as Duncan Lewis focus  their  attention  upon  the
      decision the appellant could  challenge  prior  to  the  Secretary  of
      States conceding the judicial review claim. It was only as a result of
      the concession late in the day that the appellant was able to exercise
      a right of statutory appeal against  the  refusal  of  her  protection
      claim. The 'clock' effectively began to run from the  lodging  of  the
      appeal, as the issues before the Upper Tribunal in a  judicial  review
      matter are different from those considered by the First-tier  Tribunal
      in a statutory appeal. The former involves consideration of Public Law
      principles as opposed to the fact-finding jurisdiction in a  statutory
      appeal.
  20. There are also several other matters of concern  in  relation  to  the
      decision under challenge, which give cause for concern, and which were
      the subject of the grant of permission by First-tier  Judge  Kelly  in
      relation to the fourth and fifth grounds of challenge.
  21. Ground (4) asserts the Judge failed to have regard  to  the  fact  the
      respondent had accepted that  the  appellant  was  raped  on  multiple
      occasions, and that when assessing the testimony of rape victims: "the
      shame and trauma that a person has experienced as a result of  gender-
      based violence may however result in their evidence  being  less  than
      complete, coherent or consistent. It may also  mean  that  they  delay
      disclosure." This latter statement appearing in  the  respondents  own
      publication 'Assessing credibility and refugee  status,  Version  9.0,
      Publication date: 6 January 2015, at para 7.8'.
    22. Ground (5) asserts a misdirection in law and three material aspects
        when assessing the medical evidence being (i)  by  determining  the
        credibility of the medical evidence as an "add-on" rather than part
        of the global assessment as evidenced by concluding  in  [30]  that
        the appellant had made up a "non-existent" asylum  claim  described
        in that paragraph, at [31] describing the claim as  "fiction",  but
        only thereafter considering the weight to be given to  the  medical
        evidence. This probably leads to the further alleged error  in  the
        Judge attaching "no weight" to the medical evidence for the reasons
        set out above. The Judge was required to give adequate  reasons  if
        it was considered little weight should be attached to the report of
        the Helen Bamber Foundation, especially in light of  the  fact  the
        author of the report said that  the  "overall  evaluation"  of  the
        appellant's injuries are  "consistent  with",  "highly  consistent"
        and/or "typical of" the mistreatment suffered. The  Judge  in  [31]
        hypothesised regarding possible causation which  was  preferred  in
        place of the clinical judgment  of  the  Helen  Bamber  Foundation,
        which is not a position that is adequately reasoned.
    23. The general approach by the Judge to this  matter  is  infected  by
        material legal error sufficient to  warrant  the  findings  of  the
        Judge unsafe.
    24. The only option in relation to this matter  is  to  set  aside  the
        decision in  its  entirety  and  remit  the  appeal  to  First-tier
        Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross, to be heard by another  judge  of
        that tribunal appointed by the Resident Judge per  the  operational
        requirements of the Hearing Centre.

Decision

    25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the  appeal  to  Hatton
        Cross.


   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make an anonymity order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure          (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15th of May 2017












