
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/13723/2018
                                                               PA/13724/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th April 2019                            |On 15th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                 MAH and MK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADe)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Sarker of Counsel, instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Greasley promulgated on 18 January 2019, in which their appeals against
    the Respondent's respective decisions to refuse  their  protection  and
    human rights claims, both dated 28 November 2018 were dismissed.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of  Pakistan  and  are  daughter  and  her
    mother, born respectively on 17 May  1992  and  6  January  1959.   The
    Appellants were both issued with a visit visa is to the United  Kingdom
    on 19 May 2011, valid for six months, pursuant to  which  they  entered
    the United Kingdom on 14 July 2011.  Upon the  expiry  of  their  visit
    visas, both  have  remained  unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom.   An
    application was made for leave to remain on  Article  8  grounds  on  4
    February 2013, which was refused with no right of  appeal  on  16  July
    2013 by the Respondent.  The Appellants claimed asylum on 21 April 2016
    and the First Appellant's daughter was added  as  a  dependent  on  her
    claim following her birth on 29 January 2017.  The  claims  for  asylum
    were on the basis  of  fear  of  return  to  Pakistan  of  gender-based
    violence as women and a specific fear  of  the  Appellants'  uncle  and
    cousins/brother-in-law and nephews with whom the family  used  to  live
    and whom it is claimed abused the Appellants and one of whom  attempted
    to rape the First Appellant.

 3. The Respondent refused the applications for similar reasons, primarily,
    that although in some respects the claims were given the benefit of the
    doubt, they were rejected overall due to significant inconsistencies in
    the  accounts  and  on  the  basis  of  adverse  credibility  findings,
    including because of the delay in the claim for asylum.  In any  event,
    the Respondent considered that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection
    for both of  the  Appellants  and  they  had  the  option  of  internal
    relocation within Pakistan.  Their claims under Articles 2 and 3 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights were rejected on the same basis and
    neither met the requirements of the Immigration Rules for  a  grant  of
    leave to remain on the basis  of  private  or  family  life.   Separate
    consideration was given to the medical conditions  of  the  Appellants,
    but the Respondent considered that suitable treatment was available  in
    Pakistan and neither would meet the very high threshold for a grant  of
    leave to remain on this basis.

 4. Judge Greasley dismissed the appeals in a decision  promulgated  on  18
    January 2019, primarily on the basis of  adverse  credibility  findings
    against both of the Appellants in light  of  significant  and  material
    inconsistencies in their claims.  He did not find that they would be at
    real risk of persecution on return to  Pakistan  and  their  protection
    claims were therefore refused on all grounds.  The  appeals  were  also
    dismissed on Article 8 grounds.  I return below to the  detail  of  the
    decision and reasons given for the adverse credibility  findings  which
    are relevant to this further appeal.

The appeal

 5. The Appellants appeal on eight grounds,  albeit  there  is  an  overlap
    between them,  which  are  as  follows.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in finding an inconsistency in the  Appellant's  ability
    to travel to the United Kingdom in light of the claim  that  they  were
    under the control of extended family in Pakistan and had  very  limited
    financial resources.  Secondly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    factual error when relying on evidence from the First Appellant in  her
    written statement of a barter marriage being agreed  in  her  childhood
    and also in relation to her education in Pakistan.  Thirdly,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in attaching weight to the Second Appellant's
    lack of reference to the attempted rape of the First Appellant  in  her
    asylum interview as one of  the  reasons  for  an  adverse  credibility
    finding, when this had first been raised in 2013 by her and  where  her
    interview made repeated references to  abuse.   Fourthly  and  fifthly,
    that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  not  properly  considering  or
    attaching weight to the newspaper article or the letter from  a  friend
    in Pakistan as part  of  consideration  of  the  claim  in  the  round.
    Sixthly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in making a  factual  error
    in relation to the First Appellant's claim of  attempted  rape  and  in
    particular, as to when others in the family were informed  about  this.
    Seventhly and finally, that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
    finding a contradiction between the evidence of the  First  and  Second
    Appellants  in  relation  to   the   uncle/brother-in-law's   political
    connections and a contradiction in relation to the evidence given about
    the arranged marriage between cousins.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Osborne on 21 March  2019  on
    all grounds.

 7. At the oral hearing, Mr Sarker on behalf of the  Appellants  relied  on
    the written grounds  of  appeal  and  expanded  upon  them  orally,  by
    reference to the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. In relation to the first ground, Mr Sarker submitted  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in paragraph 42 of the  decision  had  misunderstood  and
    taken out of context of the Appellants' claims to be under the  control
    of their attended family members.  They had not claimed that the  level
    of control was such that they were  not  able  to  do  anything  or  go
    anywhere, but that they were in an abusive  and  controlling  situation
    whilst living within the family unit rather than being  under  constant
    surveillance.  Further, the Appellants had the assistance of  a  friend
    to assist in organising the travel  to  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    further submitted that the financial situation of the family was  taken
    out of context in paragraph 43 of the decision and the  Appellants  had
    given a clear explanation that they were able to finance the travel  to
    the United Kingdom by the sale of family assets.

 9. Also in relation to ground one, although Mr Sarker  accepted  that  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the  Appellant's
    father/husband's   employment   was   inconsistent,   being   described
    differently as working in a motorcar/family car workshop and by himself
    as a machine operator in a factory; it was suggested  that  these  were
    similar, did not identify any significant consistency in  the  evidence
    and the benefit of the doubt should have been given to  the  Appellants
    on this point.

10. In relation to the second ground two matters were relied upon about the
    claimed arranged marriage for the First Appellant and  in  relation  to
    her studying.  Mr Sarker accepted on both  points  that  there  was  an
    inconsistency in the evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    submissions made on the Appellants'  behalf  in  2013  referring  to  a
    barter marriage and in the screening interview for the First  Appellant
    which stated that she was a  student  in  Pakistan.   However,  it  was
    submitted that the wrong source  of  the  evidence  was  identified  in
    paragraphs 44 and 45 of the decision under appeal and that in any event
    the First-tier Tribunal should  have  preferred  the  Appellants  later
    evidence that supported their claims, albeit  no  explanation  for  the
    discrepancy or inconsistency had been given nor had  any  reasons  been
    identified as to why the later account should be preferred.

11. Similar submissions were made  in  relation  to  the  third  ground  of
    challenge, where it was accepted that  the  Second  Appellant  had  not
    explicitly referred to any sexual abuse in her asylum  interview,  even
    though this had been raised  initially  in  2013  and  that  there  was
    inconsistent evidence as to when family members knew of  the  attempted
    rape and why the Appellants' father/husband left the family  home.   Mr
    Sarker accepted the inconsistencies but submitted that the wrong source
    of evidence had again been identified by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the clarifications given by the Appellant in  their  evidence  had  not
    been properly considered.

12. In relation to the fourth and fifth grounds  of  challenge,  Mr  Sarker
    submitted that both the newspaper  article  and  the  letter  from  the
    family friend in Pakistan had not been properly considered by the First-
    tier Tribunal as part of the evidence in the round,  although  accepted
    that what was said about these documents in paragraphs 48 and 49 of the
    decision was correct and these grounds of appeal did not form a  stand-
    alone challenge to the decision under  appeal  but  as  part  of  wider
    errors in the assessment of evidence.

13. In relation to ground  seven,  it  was  submitted  that  there  was  no
    inconsistent  evidence  as  to  the  knowledge   of   the   Appellants'
    father/husband's political links, neither of the Appellants  were  able
    to provide detail of this and were consistent about what they did know.
     This issue is relevant not only  to  risk,  but  more  importantly  to
    whether there is a sufficiency of protection  and  internal  relocation
    available to the Appellants.

14. No separate submissions were made in relation to grounds six and  eight
    on the basis that these points  had  been  subsumed  within  the  other
    grounds already.

15. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Bramble made a number of general points
    in relation to the appeal.  Specifically that the  decision  should  be
    read as a whole, bearing in mind  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from both  Appellants
    and made it clear in paragraph 39  that  having  assessed  all  of  the
    evidence in the round, the  appeals  must  be  dismissed  with  adverse
    credibility findings made against both of the Appellants  whose  claims
    he found  were  "effectively  riddled  with  significant  and  material
    inconsistencies.".  It  was  also  of  importance  that  there  was  no
    supporting evidence whatsoever from other family members in the  United
    Kingdom as to the Appellants' claims and no reason for  their  lack  of
    support.  Overall, it was submitted that the grounds of appeal amounted
    only to disagreement with the reasons  for  the  decision  and  do  not
    identify any errors of law.

16. In relation to the specific  grounds,  by  reference  to  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal, it was submitted that detailed findings
    were made, properly taking into account all the  evidence,  which  were
    open to the Judge.  There  were  numerous  inconsistencies  within  the
    Appellants' claims which were appropriately identified  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In relation to the points made  as  to  the  source  of
    evidence relied upon by the Judge, Mr Bramble noted that in  the  index
    to the Respondent's bundle submissions made on behalf of the Appellants
    in 2013 were referred to as statements and it may simply be  that  this
    description has  been  repeated  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal when  referring  to  those  documents  which  do  contain  the
    detailed matters relied upon.

Findings and reasons

17. In light of the nature of the grounds of challenge in this  appeal,  it
    is necessary for each ground to look in more detail at the findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the evidence before it  on  the  particular
    point, albeit I consider these by theme rather  than  strictly  by  the
    grounds  put  forward  by  the  Appellants  within  which   there   are
    overlapping issues.

 1. The First-tier Tribunal set out its approach to  consideration  of  the
    evidence and made general findings of adverse credibility against  both
    Appellants  in  paragraphs  36  to  39  of  the  decision  and   relied
    specifically  on  the  lack  of  any  supporting  evidence   from   the
    Appellants' immediate family in the United Kingdom in paragraphs 40 and
    41 of the decision.  There is no challenge to the approach set out, nor
    to the significant omission of evidence  from  other  immediate  family
    members whom it is claimed were subject to the same or similar abuse in
    Pakistan as these Appellants.  The Appellants grounds of challenge  are
    to the specific findings in paragraphs 42 to 52 of the  decision  which
    provide reasons for the adverse credibility findings made, primarily by
    identification  of  significant  inconsistencies  in  the   Appellants'
    evidence.

 2. The issues of finance, control, education and work  in  Pakistan  dealt
    with in paragraphs 42, 43 and 45 of the decision as follows:

         "42. Equally,  although  I  am  asked  to  accept  that  the  first
         appellant's   brother-in-law's   family   were   controlling    and
         effectively kept the appellant's  family  imprisoned  at  a  family
         compound, it is clear that the family was able to  organise  travel
         to the United Kingdom, make applications  through  entry  clearance
         officers, and book flights.  I do not accept the first  appellant's
         claim that she would have been able to do this while  out  shopping
         or attending medical appointments if  her  brother-in-law's  family
         was as controlling as is claimed.  Even if she had been able to  do
         this, those events are also inconsistent with the  first  appellant
         claims that the family were effectively placed under strict control
         by her relatives living in Pakistan.

         43.  In relation to  the  first  appellant's  claims,  it  was  not
         accepted by the respondent that she had lived with the  brother-in-
         law and his family.  The first appellant had claimed that financial
         circumstances did not permit them renting a place of their own  and
         had little means of income,  but  this  is  inconsistent  with  the
         account that she had been able to  fund  the  trip  to  the  United
         Kingdom for herself and her husband, and then finance  tickets  for
         the whole family.  The first appellant  also  claimed  her  husband
         worked underpaid at her brother-in-law's motorcar workshop but this
         was again inconsistent  with  her  husband's  screening  interview,
         where he claimed he worked as a  machine  operator  in  a  factory.
         This evidence further damages the appellant's credibility.

         ...

         45.  Nor do I accept that the first appellant had  been  mistreated
         and controlled by the brother-in-law and  his  family.   The  first
         appellant claimed an interview that her daughters were educated  in
         Pakistan, but then claimed on the asylum interview, at questions 30
         and 31, that the brother-in-law would not allow  the  daughters  to
         study.  The first appellant had also claimed that she had paid  for
         her family to travel to the United Kingdom in 2011 by selling  gold
         and using savings, but then claimed in interview  that  her  family
         was poor, weak, and afraid.  They were often deprived of  food.   I
         find it is simply not a credible account that the  first  appellant
         has provided.  The claims are materially inconsistent."

 3. The findings in the paragraphs above  disclose  no  error  of  law  and
    contain findings which were reasonably open to the First-tier  Tribunal
    on the evidence before it.  The Appellants' claims in relation  to  the
    limited finances and controlling and abusive environment with  extended
    family are unarguably inconsistent  with  the  ability  of  the  Second
    Appellant and her husband to travel to the United Kingdom in 2010 for a
    visit and then for the whole family of five to travel in 2011 with  the
    incumbent organisation and expense required to  do  so.   There  is  no
    misunderstanding or taking out of context the claims of control made by
    the Appellants, it is entirely lawful and reasonable to have  concluded
    that the Appellants' claims are inconsistent on this basis.

 4. In relation to the Appellants' father's/husband's work, it was accepted
    on behalf of the Appellants that there was an inconsistency between his
    own evidence of employment and that given by the Second  Appellant  and
    no reason why  any  benefit  of  the  doubt  should  be  given  to  the
    Appellants on this point.  The inconsistency has not been explained  at
    all and therefore there is no basis upon which the Appellants' evidence
    should be accepted as opposed to the inconsistency itself being  relied
    upon  as  one  of  many  examples  going  to  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellants' claims.

 5. It is the same case in relation to  the  First  Appellant's  education,
    there was clearly inconsistent  evidence  from  the  Appellants  as  to
    whether or not the First  Appellant  was  educated  in  Pakistan,  with
    answers within interviews being both that the extended family would not
    allow it, or that she did enter education but it was difficult.   There
    is also evidence  in  the  First  Appellant's  screening  interview  of
    education - when asked her occupation in Pakistan, it was  stated  that
    she was a student.  This is not, as first suggested by the  Appellants,
    a misunderstanding as to the First Appellant  studying  in  the  United
    Kingdom after arrival rather than in Pakistan  and  again,  Mr  Sarker,
    accepted the inconsistencies in  the  evidence.   Again,  there  is  no
    explanation for the inconsistency given by either of the Appellants and
    it is the inconsistency itself which is relied  upon  for  the  adverse
    credibility findings rather than the First-tier Tribunal preferring one
    account as opposed to the other.

 6. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal in  relation  to  the  possible
    marriage between the First Appellant and one of her  cousins  is  dealt
    with in paragraphs 44 and 51 of the decision as follows:

         "44. Nor was it accepted that the first appellant's daughters  were
         being forced to marry the  brother-in-law's  sons.   In  the  first
         appellant's statement, she claimed that her daughters were  engaged
         to their cousins in their childhood in a barter marriage which  was
         arranged by the first appellant's husband and  his  brother.   This
         claim is, I  find,  inconsistent  with  the  claim  in  the  asylum
         interview that the brother-in-law's family made a proposal in  2010
         for the son to marry the second appellant.

         ...

         51.  The second appellant also claimed that there were arrangements
         in place to marry her cousin Anwar (witness statement page  2)  but
         at questions 69 and 70 stated that an  arranged  marriage  had  not
         been set up."

 7. Although there is reference in paragraph 44 to  the  First  Appellant's
    statement, this is not a reference to the  written  statement  produced
    for the purpose of the appeal hearing, but appears  to  be  a  somewhat
    inaccurate reference to submissions made on behalf of the Appellants by
    Wilsons Solicitors on 23 September 2013, in which it is clearly  stated
    that two of the daughters  were  engaged  to  their  cousins  in  their
    childhood in a barter marriage arranged between  the  husband  and  his
    brother.  Even if the source is inaccurately described  (which  may  in
    this case be because that letter was described by the Respondent in the
    index to the appeal bundle as a statement), there is no doubt that that
    contradictory evidence about whether there was a barter marriage agreed
    in childhood or a marriage proposal in 2010  which  was  rejected,  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  It was  suggested  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants that the Judge  did  not  properly  take  into  account  the
    Appellants' explanation, however there was no  explanation  as  to  the
    inconsistencies in the claim, nor any reason again why one  version  of
    the claim should have been preferred, to the Appellants' benefit,  over
    another.  It was  the  inconsistency  itself  which  was  appropriately
    relied upon by the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The issues  are  essentially  the  same  in  relation  to  the  claimed
    attempted rape of the First Appellant and how/when other family members
    were informed of this, wherein the inconsistencies in  the  Appellants'
    claims set out by the First-tier Tribunal in paragraphs 46 and 50  were
    accepted by Mr Sarker, but it was in the alternative suggested that the
    wrong references to the evidence were  cited  and  that  clarifications
    made by the Appellants to the claim were not properly  considered.   At
    its highest, there is an inaccuracy in paragraph 50 by referring to the
    submissions made on the Appellants' behalf in 2013 by their  Solicitors
    as a 'statement', but in substance there is no error of fact or failure
    to consider evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  This  is  also  a
    further example of an inconsistency which has been entirely unexplained
    by the either Appellant and where the First-tier Tribunal is relying on
    the inconsistency itself rather than preferring one part of the account
    over another, without any  basis  being  offered  for  one  view  being
    preferred.

 9. The final issue in relation to consistency of the claims made is as  to
    the Appellants' knowledge of their father's/husband's political  links.
    The findings of the First-tier Tribunal on this point are at paragraphs
    47 and 52 as follows:

         "47. The first appellant also claimed the family had been unable to
         report the ill-treatment the police in Pakistan as the  brother-in-
         law had political connections.  She claimed he was  connected  with
         the Pakistan Muslim League but there is no  supporting  documentary
         evidence in relation to this claim.

         ...

         52.  Equally, I find  that  the  second  appellant  has  failed  to
         provide credible evidence that her uncle was an influential  person
         with political links.  It is relevant that when asked as to how the
         second appellant knew her uncle had links to  the  police  she  was
         unable to provide any details other than to say that  she  saw  him
         with the police when they visited the family  home.   In  interview
         question 81, the second  appellant  stated  that  her  parents  had
         informed the children that uncle has links  to  very  high  ranking
         people including the police, but when her mother  was  asked  about
         these matters in interview she had merely stated that she "did  not
         know about these matters" and that  the  family  simply  stayed  in
         their rooms."

10. The points relied upon as to this issue  within  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal are not  in  relation  to  inconsistencies  in  the
    accounts given by the Appellants, but rely on the  lack  of  detail  or
    evidence provided by either as  to  the  wider  families  influence  or
    political links.  The Appellants' evidence on this  can  reasonably  be
    described as  thin  and  in  certain  respects,  circular,  relying  on
    information from  each  other  in  circumstances  where  neither  could
    provide any detail.  Those findings were unarguably open to the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the reasons  contained  therein  have  at  best  been
    misunderstood by the Appellants within the ground  of  appeal  on  this
    point.

11. The final two issues are  in  relation  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    treatment of the newspaper article in relation to the  family  and  the
    letter of support from a family friend in  Pakistan,  which  are  dealt
    with in paragraph 48 and 49 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
     The newspaper article is a declaration of  disassociation,  containing
    three sentences stating that there is no contact between  them  and  no
    responsibility for the Appellants or their  immediate  family  will  be
    undertaken.  That is inconsistent, as found by the First-tier Tribunal,
    with the Appellants' claims that the article stated the family would be
    hunted down and at risk.  However, no threats are made within it and it
    takes the Appellants' protection claim no further.

12. The letter from the family friend in Pakistan to the  effect  that  the
    Appellants' extended family there are making threats also lends  little
    weight or credibility to the claims made when all of  the  evidence  is
    considered in the round.  As acknowledged by Mr Sarker on behalf of the
    Appellants, this is not a standalone ground of appeal which  of  itself
    could amount to a material error of law.  In any event, I find no error
    in the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions in relation to this particular
    piece of evidence.

13. For the reasons set out above, the First-tier Tribunal has not erred in
    law on any of the grounds of appeal relied upon by the Appellants.  The
    decision is a well  reasoned  one,  taking  into  account  all  of  the
    evidence before  it  and  reaching  an  entirely  rational  and  lawful
    conclusion that neither Appellant was  credible  due  to  their  claims
    being riddled with material inconsistencies and taking into account the
    complete lack of supporting evidence from immediate family  members  in
    the United Kingdom.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeals is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     13th May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

