
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13185/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2019                         |On 08 February 2019             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 JACOB ADAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Davison instructed by Ison Harrison Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on 6 February 2018 in which the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant claimed to be a citizen of Eritrea who  was  entitled
        to a grant of international protection. The claim was  rejected  by
        the respondent who believed the  appellant  to  be  a  national  of
        Ethiopia. The appellant's claim is that he left Eritrea at the  age
        of 4 and travel to Ethiopia with his parents.  He left Ethiopia  on
        16 July 2017 by plane, claiming asylum in  the  United  Kingdom  on
        arrival.
     3. Having considered the appellant's and respondent's case  the  Judge
        sets out his findings of fact  from  [58]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge; noting that if the appellant was credible in  his  claim
        to be a national of Eritrea then he was  entitled  to  a  grant  of
        international protection.
     4. The Judge notes what are described as a number of  factors  in  the
        appellant's favour set out at [59] of the decision but also notes a
        number of other  factors  which  are  said  to  count  against  the
        appellant which are set out at [61  -  69],  leading  to  the  core
        findings at [70 - 73] in the following terms:

             70.  It does not appear to me to be reasonably likely that  if
                  the officials at the Ethiopian Embassy had been aware that
                  the Appellant lived in  Ethiopia  for  14  years  and  had
                  married an Ethiopian national that they would dismiss  the
                  Appellant's attempts to obtain  their  assistance  in  the
                  manner that the Appellant has claimed. As stated, the fact
                  that no further attempts were made to  obtain  information
                  from  the  Ethiopian  authority  have  not  assisted   the
                  Appellant.


             71.  I therefore conclude that the Appellant has  not  made  a
                  genuine  attempt   to   establish   with   the   Ethiopian
                  authorities in the United Kingdom that he is not  entitled
                  to Ethiopian nationality.


             72.  To summarise, on the basis of what I have stated above  I
                  find it reasonably likely that the Appellant is a national
                  of Ethiopia and not a national of Eritrea as  claimed  and
                  that he is not entitled to international protection.


             My Decision


             73.  The Appellant cannot discharge the burden of  proof  upon
                  him to satisfy me that there is a serious  possibility  or
                  reasonable chance if he is returned to  Ethiopia  that  he
                  will or may be persecuted  for  a  Convention  reason.  He
                  cannot be returned to Eritrea as he is not a  national  of
                  that country. His appeal is dismissed on  asylum  grounds.
                  Applying  the  same  standard  of  proof  his  appeal   is
                  dismissed on human rights grounds.

     5. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal who found  the  grounds  amounted  to  nothing  more  than
        disagreement with  the  findings  of  Judge  Davis.  The  appellant
        renewed the application resulting in permission being granted by  a
        judge of the Upper Tribunal, the operative parts of the grant being
        in the following terms:

             In his witness statement, dated 25 August 2017, the  Appellant
             explained that he was enrolled in a school by a friend of  his
             mother's and that he and his mother  were  not  able  to  rent
             their own home in Ethiopia. He also said that they attended  a
             variety of churches as they were afraid  that  their  Eritrean
             identity would be discovered. The  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
             did not refer to any of this evidence or make any findings  on
             it.


             In  addition,  he  did  not  refer  to  the  contents  of  the
             Appellant's witness statement, dated 12  January  2018,  which
             addressed the points made in the Respondent's refusal letter.


             The Judge did not give sufficient weight to the reasons  given
             by the Eritrean Community in Lambeth for concluding  that  the
             Appellant was Eritrean or  any  reasons  for  disputing  these
             reasons.


             As a consequence, First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Davies'  decision
             contains arguable errors of law and it is appropriate to grant
             permission to appeal.


Error of law


     6. The Judge took into account the appellant's case  stating  at  [27]
        that the basis of the case is set out in the Notice on  Grounds  of
        Appeal. The Judge confirms  he  has  taken  into  account  all  the
        evidence submitted by the appellant's  representatives  with  their
        letter of 16 January 2018 and has  read  and  considered  both  the
        appellant's screening and substantive  interviews  and  taken  into
        account the  evidence  contained  in  the  appellants  two  witness
        statements and the evidence  he  gave  at  the  hearing;  including
        submissions made  by  the  appellant's  representative.  The  Judge
        confirms the witness statements were adopted by  the  appellant  in
        his oral evidence [29].
     7. It cannot necessarily be inferred from the  fact  that  a  relevant
        point is not expressly mentioned that it had not  been  taken  into
        account by the Judge. I find it clear from the  decision  that  the
        Judge had in mind the relevant legal principles,  and  it  has  not
        been made out that the Judge did not apply them appropriately.
     8. In relation to the visit to the Embassy,  the  grounds  assert  the
        Judge erred as when finding at [70] that  no  further  attempt  had
        been made to obtain information from  the  Ethiopian  Embassy.  The
        appellant asserts that in his bundle at page A14 is  a  copy  of  a
        letter sent by his solicitors to the Ethiopian  Embassy  in  London
        dated 12 January 2018 referring to the client by name and  advising
        the Embassy that they seek their assistance to establish his  right
        to Ethiopian citizenship or residence in the absence  of  a  formal
        identity document. The  letter  notes  in  the  5th  paragraph  "We
        understand that our client attended your embassy in person on  10th
        January, but that he was unable to speak directly to  a  member  of
        staff, without proof of his Ethiopian identity (which he  does  not
        possess)". The solicitors requested an appointment for their client
        to attend the Embassy again this time to discuss what steps he  can
        possibly take to establish is right to  Ethiopian  citizenship  and
        residence and to obtain the relevant documentation as proof of that
        right.  Although  the  letter  requested  a  response  before  19th
        January, the hearing before the Judge taking place  on  22  January
        2018, this does not establish arguable legal error in  the  finding
        of the Judge. The appellant was seeking an application for Eritrean
        identity in relation to which the website clearly states that  'all
        applications must be made in person at the Embassy as you  will  be
        required to provide fingerprints to prove nationality'.  The  Judge
        was also arguably correct in finding that  the  appellant  had  not
        made a genuine attempt to establish with the Ethiopian  authorities
        that he is not entitled to Ethiopian nationality for,  although  he
        appears to have been frustrated by necessary procedure, it does not
        appear he has been able to speak to an official at the  Embassy  or
        provide fingerprints or other documentation that they require.  The
        finding of the Judge that it had  not  been  established  that  the
        appellant will not be granted or recognised as an Ethiopian citizen
        is therefore arguably correct. It is not made  out  that  the  fact
        there had been no response from the Embassy before the  hearing  is
        indicative of a  refusal  to  recognise  the  appellant.  The  time
        between the solicitor's letter and date of  hearing  is  relatively
        short and there was no evidence that a reply would have  been  made
        before the hearing. No evidence was provided at the Initial hearing
        that took this issue any further.
     9. The claim in the grounds the Judge applied the  wrong  standard  of
        proof  has  no  arguable  merit.  It  is  clear  from  reading  the
        determination that the Judge  applied  the  lower  standard.    The
        assertion  the  Judge  inverted  the  applicable  standard  has  no
        arguable merit and is not made out having  read  the  determination
        and available evidence.
    10. Having considered the evidence with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny I find the Judge gives adequate  reasons  in  support  the
        findings made. A reader of the decision can clearly understand  why
        the Judge concluded as he did. There is no arguable merit in Ground
        2 suggesting otherwise.
    11. The appellant fails to establish the conclusions of the  Judge  are
        irrational or outside the range of findings reasonably open to  the
        Judge on the evidence. Disagreement  with  the  findings  does  not
        establish irrationality.
    12. The challenge to  the  Judge's  findings  at  [65  -  66]  that  he
        understood from the appellant's own evidence that he and his mother
        lived in Addis Ababa  without  difficulty,  whereas  the  appellant
        claims that he and his mother were unable to rent  property,  would
        face problems if encountered by the  police,  had  to  register  to
        attend school under a false  identity,  was  unable  to  apply  for
        identity documents, was unable to register his marriage, and  lived
        in constant fear of deportation, is noted. The Judge rejects as not
        credible the appellant's claim to have married his wife at home and
        that their marriage was not registered by the Ethiopian authorities
        at [64]. The decision has to be read as a whole to  understand  the
        Judge's basis for making the statement that the appellant  and  his
        mother were able to live in Ethiopian without difficulty. The Judge
        notes at [65] that no steps were taken to remove them to Eritrea or
        place  them  in  a  refugee  camp  which  the  country  information
        indicates are the actions normally taken of the authorities if they
        encounter those with no right to remain in Ethiopia.  Even  if  the
        appellant and his mother experience some difficulties it  is  clear
        that they are able to stay in Ethiopia for a number  of  years,  in
        relation to the appellant some 16 years [61] attend  education  for
        which  appropriate  evidence  must  have  been  provided   to   the
        authorities, without evidence of the  type  of  difficulties  those
        without status would ordinarily be  able  to  rely  upon  in  their
        evidence.
    13. So far as the Eritrean Community  in  Lambert  are  concerned,  the
        Judge specifically refers to their letter at  [68]  accepting  that
        the appellant was questioned in some detail about his knowledge  of
        Eritrea, but failing to understand on what basis the author of  the
        letter stated categorically  that  the  appellant  is  an  Eritrean
        national as the letter  contains  no  details  regarding  enquiries
        made, what elders they spoke to  and  what  those  elders  said  to
        indicate what the appellant's nationality was. The Judge noted that
        the author of the letter could have provided a witness statement or
        attended court to give oral evidence, which is a factually  correct
        statement. The Judge does not reject this evidence  because  it  is
        not corroborated but clearly states that had it  been  corroborated
        it may have warranted greater weight being given to it. The  reason
        the Judge gives less weight is clearly set out at  [69];  that  the
        evidence in the letter is vague and the sources for the conclusions
        are not clearly set out and specified. This  evidence  was  clearly
        considered by the Judge and the weight to be given to that evidence
        was a matter for him.
    14. The grounds fail to establish arguable legal error material to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal. Whilst the appellant disagrees with
        the outcome and seeks more favourable  findings  that  is  not  the
        required test. It is not made out the conclusions reached  are  not
        within the range of those reasonably available to the Judge. It  is
        not made out the weight  given  to  the  evidence  is  in  any  way
        arguably irrational or not warranted on the evidence.
    15. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is  made  out  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper  Tribunal
        interfering any further in this appeal.


Decision

    16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 23 January 2019

