
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13212/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th August 2019                  |On 16th September 2019               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     F C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  in  the  light  of  the
    circumstances surrounding this claim.  Unless and until a court directs
    otherwise the Appellant is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly refer to  her  or  her  family
    members.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
    Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  panel   (Judge   Cruthers   and   Judge   Jepson)
    (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "panel")  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 8th May 2019, dismissed her claim for protection and
    her human rights claim.

 3. The background to the Appellant's claim is set out in the determination
    of the panel and in the decision  letter  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    issued on 6 November 2018.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica. Her sister had been the subject
    of a sexual assault when resident in Jamaica by the son  of  an  MP  in
    2013. This had been reported to police and thereafter it was said  that
    their uncle had been killed. That night unknown men had attended at the
    house. The appellant and her sister lost contact  and  did  not  regain
    contact until the appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2018. In  the
    interim, the appellant's sister had come to the  United  Kingdom  on  5
    December 2013 and claimed asylum on  15  April  2014  and  was  granted
    refugee status on the 12 September 2014. The  appellant  did  not  know
    when her sister had come to the UK (see paragraph 4 statement dated  29
    /8/18). The appellant remained in Jamaica with her son and lived with a
    friend of hers but when a threat letter had been  sent,  she  could  no
    longer stay the friend and went to live with a man with whom she had  a
    relationship with.

 5. The appellant made an application for a visit Visa in March 2015 having
    obtained a passport on 20 February 2015. In that application  she  gave
    details of her employment since 2007 as a cook and  that  she  had  her
    aunt in the United Kingdom. No other family relatives were  named.  The
    application was refused on 13 March 2015. A second application that was
    made in January 2018 was granted and the appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 29th of January 2018 with entry clearance as a visitor.

 6. The appellant claimed asylum on 5 June 2018 on the basis that  she  was
    at risk of harm from the MPs son if returned to Jamaica. In a  decision
    letter dated 6 November 2018, the respondent gave reasons as to why the
    Secretary of State rejected the appellant's claim.

 7. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal came before the FtT panel on  the  10th  April  2019  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on 8 May 2019 her appeal was dismissed.

 8. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and granted on grounds  2
    -4 but refused permission on ground 1 by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Andrew) but was granted on reconsideration  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Alis on the 3rd July 2019 for the following reasons:

         "On the basis that the other grounds of appeal,  all  connected  to
         the protection claim  were  found  arguable  I  find  it  would  be
         appropriate to extend the  scope  of  the  appeal  to  include  all
         grounds raised."

 9. The appeal was therefore listed before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  At  that
    hearing the appellant was represented  by  Mr  Holmes  of  Counsel  who
    appeared  before  the  FtTJ,  and  had  drafted  the  grounds,  and  Ms
    Petterson,  senior  presenting  officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.

10. I am grateful for the submissions heard from Mr Holmes and Ms Petterson
    on the issues that arise in the four grounds advanced on behalf of  the
    appellant. I confirm  that  I  have  considered  those  submissions  in
    accordance with the decision of the panel and  the  grounds  which  had
    been filed before the Upper Tribunal. I further  confirm  that  I  have
    given full consideration to those submissions which I have heard, and I
    intend to incorporate those submissions into my analysis of the grounds
    that are relied upon by the appellant.

Grounds 1 and 3:

11. It will be convenient to consider grounds 1 and 3 together.  Mr  Holmes
    relies upon the written grounds. He submits that the panel erred in law
    and that the panel were wrong to attach no positive weight to the grant
    of status to the appellant's sister when considering the claim made  by
    the appellant which was made on the same factual basis. He directed the
    Tribunal's attention to paragraph 13 in which the panel  accepted  that
    there was some overlap in the factual circumstances, but  he  submitted
    the panel failed to adequately deal with this at paragraph 26 of  their
    decision.

12. In his submissions, he accepted that where the panel stated  that  they
    were not bound by the respondent's decision in respect of the appellant
    that this was correct in law but that the panel were wrong to attach no
    weight the grant of status. Thus the panel took too narrow an  approach
    to the significance of the status of the appellant's  sister  and  this
    was independent evidence in support of the appellant's  claim.  As  the
    appellant's sister was granted status, the sexual assault was found  to
    be true and the surrounding circumstances such  as  the  influence  and
    reach of the perpetrators should likewise be treated as true. Therefore
    he submitted that there was a material fact that the panel left out  of
    account in its reasoning.

13. In respect  of  ground  3,  he  submitted  that  this  was  a  "reasons
    challenge" to the panel's decision and that the panel  failed  to  give
    any or any adequate reasons for a number of its findings.  The  written
    grounds relied on paragraph 31 where the  panel  stated  they  did  not
    accept the reasons given for the delay between  the  incident  and  the
    claim for asylum and that  they  rejected  the  explanation  given  for
    delaying the asylum claim in the UK.

14. In his oral submissions he  stated  that  the  appellant  had  given  a
    detailed narrative which  had  not  been  engaged  with  and  that  the
    appellant was entitled to know why her account had  been  rejected  and
    this related to her circumstances in Jamaica.

15. Ms Petterson on  behalf  of  the  respondent  relied  on  the  rule  24
    response. She submitted that paragraphs 3  -  4  the  panel  took  into
    account the evidence relating to the appellant's sister. At  paragraphs
    26 - 27 the panel started from the premise that it  was  accepted  that
    the rape had occurred, and the panel took  that  into  account  but  in
    their assessment, they were looking at the real risk to  the  appellant
    as at the date of the hearing. She submitted that in  the  findings  of
    fact at paragraphs 28 - 33, the panel properly directed  themselves  to
    the risk on return for this appellant as at the date of the hearing  in
    2019. At paragraph 29, the panel considered the  claim  made  that  she
    lived in difficult circumstances, but the panel clearly were looking at
    who the appellant was at risk from and  the  quality  of  the  evidence
    advanced. She identified that the panel were not  bound  by  the  grant
    itself but had, in any event, adopted part of  the  factual  matrix  in
    reaching their conclusions.

16. As to ground 3, she submitted that the panel  had  given  a  number  of
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's account and that paragraph 31 was
    relied upon in the written  grounds,  was  a  summary  of  the  earlier
    findings set out at paragraphs 24 and 25  and  therefore  there  was  a
    sufficiency of reasoning.

17. I am satisfied that there is no error of law in  the  panel's  approach
    when considering the circumstances of the appellant's  sister  and  the
    grant of status in her favour. It is submitted  that  panel  failed  to
    attach positive weight to the grant of status and Mr Holmes directed my
    attention to paragraph 26 of the decision. At that paragraph panel said
    this:

         "The appellant invites us to follow a simple chain of  logic-  that
         the sister was granted asylum on the basis of certain facts, and so
         the appellant is equally entitled. We do not accept that.  Although
         it is open to the appellant to make that argument, we find  we  are
         not  bound  by  the  decision  regarding  the  sister.  Reaching  a
         conclusion, we have regard to  the  guidance  from  Gustavo  Suarez
         Ocampo [2006] EWCA Civ 1276."

18. However, paragraph 26 should not be taken in isolation  and  to  do  so
    fails to have regard to the panel's consideration as  a  whole.  It  is
    plain that the panel were aware of  and  took  into  account  that  the
    appellant's sister had been granted status by the  respondent  and  the
    circumstances of the claim. That is clear from paragraph  3  where  the
    panel recorded "Related and relevant to this appeal  is  the  grant  of
    leave to remain to the  appellant's  sister,  xxxx,  on  or  around  10
    September 2014." The panel referred to the documents  attached  to  the
    Home Office letter dated 2 January 2019 disclosing  records  concerning
    the claim made by her sister

19. At paragraph 13, the panel set out what we described as "agreed facts."
    It is important to note that there the panel stated:

         "The sister was granted leave to remain based on some of  the  same
         background circumstances asserted by this appellant."

    Not all of the circumstances were the same.

20. At paragraph 27 the panel set out another agreed fact which formed part
    of the factual matrix where they accepted that the sexual  assault  had
    occurred. The decision letter had been amended in this respect.

21. In my judgment the panel  clearly  began  their  consideration  of  the
    appellant's appeal with that in mind and as their starting  point  that
    the appellant's sister been  granted  leave  to  remain  based  on  the
    circumstances including the sexual assault having taken place and  that
    the  appellant's  claim  was  therefore  based  on  similar  background
    circumstances. Contrary to the grounds, the  panel  did  give  positive
    weight to that fact.

22. The approach to be taken by Tribunal to earlier findings of  fact  made
    in a determination relating to a different  party,  such  as  a  family
    member,  but  arising  out  of  the  same  factual   circumstances   is
    established in cases such as AA (Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ  1040
    and Ocampo v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1276 and that in  such  a  case,  the
    guidance given in Devaseelan applies  and  that  the  first  Tribunal's
    determination should be the starting point  (see  AL  (Albania)  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 950).

23. In his  submissions,  Mr  Holmes  accepted  that  the  panel  correctly
    directed themselves in law when they stated that they were not bound by
    the earlier decision of the respondent. On the  facts  of  the  present
    appeal there been no previous findings of fact set  out  in  a  written
    decision by a Tribunal judge. The appellant's sister had not given  any
    evidence  but  had  been  granted  status  by  the  respondent  on  the
    application made on or around 12 September 2014, four years before  the
    appellant entered the UK. Nonetheless the panel took into  account  the
    grant of status to the appellant's sister.

24. In my judgement the panel did give weight  to  the  appellant  sister's
    claim as a starting point as is made clear by  the  acceptance  of  the
    "agreed facts" and the references made by  the  panel  to  the  factual
    account and where they highlighted that this was one of the  issues  in
    the case (see paragraph 15  of  their  decision).  However,  they  were
    entitled to scrutinise the  evidence  that  they  had  before  them  in
    determining this appellant's claim which  included  the  oral  evidence
    from the appellant sister and whether, on the evidence before them,  it
    had been demonstrated  that  there  was  a  real  likelihood  that  the
    appellant would also be at risk of persecutory harm on return.

25. The panel set out  their  findings  of  fact  paragraph  17  -  31  and
    highlighted in their assessment evidence from both  the  appellant  and
    the appellant's sister that neither could identify the  MP  (indirectly
    involved). The core of the appellant's claim was that  her  sister  had
    been the subject of a serious sexual assault by the son of a  local  MP
    and that since reporting this  to  the  police,  the  family  had  been
    targeted by the authorities. The panel found that neither the appellant
    nor her sister could identify the MP involved; they claimed a neighbour
    told them despite the claim that a report had said to have been made to
    the police, and no attempts had been made  to seek a name. At paragraph
    [20] the panel gave reasons for rejecting the account of events of both
    witnesses. The panel found it incomprehensible that the family  members
    concerned asked no questions at all as to the name of the  MP  as  this
    was "at the heart of the claims made by  the  appellant's  sister"  and
    referred to the evidence that the family had never tried  to  find  out
    the MP's name and the panel found that it was difficult  to  understand
    how no questions at all were asked about the name  of  the  MP  in  the
    context where the sexual assault was said to be reported to  the  local
    police. The panel placed weight  on  the  fact  that  that  beyond  the
    letter, which they went on to deal with later on, no  further  problems
    had occurred, no threatening letter had been produced and  whilst  they
    accepted the appellant to have been the subject of  a  sexual  assault,
    the perpetrator not been identified as the son of an MP and whilst they
    accepted that the uncle had been killed, the local newspaper attributed
    this to a fishing accident and the panel did not accept  that  it  been
    directly linked to the assault (see paragraphs 27 and 29).

26. When looking at the decision as a whole, the panel plainly gave  weight
    to the appellant's sister's grant  of  status  as  the  starting  point
    alongside the agreed facts. As they had the advantage  of  hearing  the
    evidence of the appellant and her sister, in  my  judgment,  the  panel
    were entitled to make their own assessment of that  evidence  which  is
    what panel did.

27. In any event, at paragraph 28 onwards, the panel considered  the  claim
    on the alternative basis by taking the case at its highest as indicated
    by their opening remarks "even if we were to accept  all  the  evidence
    before us, the key issue here is time  -  whether  in  April  2019  the
    appellant faces a real risk of persecutory ill-treatment in Jamaica. It
    does not necessarily follow that the sister would face a real  risk  of
    persecutory or treatment in Jamaica now. Much less is it  follows  that
    the appellant faces a similar risk  now."  On  this  basis,  they  were
    clearly placing weight on the grant of status.

28. The panel, in the alternative, therefore considered whether as  at  the
    date of the hearing in April 2019 whether the appellant  faced  a  real
    risk of persecutory treatment or harm. At paragraphs 29 - 31 the  panel
    gave reasons why on the  evidence  before  them  -  there  was  nothing
    directly attributable  to  the  MP's  son  that  had  occurred  to  the
    appellant and there was no evidence to show any ongoing threat from the
    MPs son and that even if such a fear might have existed at the time  of
    the sexual assault, they found that it had dissipated  thereafter.  The
    panel made reference to the length of time since the events (2013)  and
    importantly that "no evidence was submitted to show that the  MP  (even
    if the rape could be  attributed  to  their  son)  still  lives  and/or
    occupies a position of power."

29. Whilst the grounds (ground 3) assert that there was  an  inadequacy  of
    reasoning by the panel, relying on paragraph 31, that paragraph is  the
    omnibus conclusion of the earlier findings of fact set  out  paragraphs
    24 and 25.

30. In my judgment there is no inadequacy of reasoning. The panel  set  out
    its findings of fact which I have referred to above by reference to the
    evidence. They dealt with the core of the appellant's  claim  and  gave
    reasons as to why on the evidence before them they were  not  satisfied
    that it been demonstrated  that  there  was  any  ongoing  risk  to  be
    appellant. As set out above, the panel,  by  taking  the  case  at  its
    highest and therefore accepting  the  appellant's  account,  thereafter
    gave adequate and sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion  that
    as at the date of the hearing, the appellant had not demonstrated  that
    she was at real risk of persecutory harm.

31.  Whilst Mr Holmes submitted that  the  alternative  finding  should  be
    viewed with caution, in my judgment it was entirely open to  the  panel
    to reach a conclusion by taking the  case  at  its  highest  and  their
    assessment on the evidence as to whether on that basis there was a well-
    founded fear of persecution at the date of the hearing. The panel  gave
    adequate and sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion that there
    was no such risk  given  the  lapse  of  time,  the  lack  of  evidence
    concerning any ongoing risk and importantly, that there was no evidence
    that the person, who the appellant claimed was the driving force behind
    the persecutory harm, was still alive or in a position of power.

32. Drawing those matters together, in my judgment grounds 1 and 3 are  not
    made out.

Ground 2:

33. Mr Holmes relies on the written grounds. Ground 2 asserts that there is
    is a material mistake of fact in relation to  the  panel's  finding  at
    [25] where the panel stated that the appellant knew before she  arrived
    in the UK about a sister having made a claim for asylum.

34. Mr Holmes submitted that the finding had no evidential  foundation  and
    did not feature in  the  witness  statement  or  asylum  interview.  At
    question 85 of the substantive interview, the appellant had been  asked
    how her sister got the UK and the response was "I never asked her."  He
    therefore submitted that the appellant had no  state  of  knowledge  in
    relation to her sister's claim and therefore the Tribunal was  mistaken
    in fact.

35. In his oral submissions he made reference to the panel failing to  take
    into account the appellant's oral evidence at the hearing.  In  support
    of this submission he read from his own typed record on  his  computer.
    This evidence had not been set out in the grounds  nor  had  the  notes
    been produced prior to the hearing so that any agreed record  could  be
    considered alongside those held by the respondent  and  the  record  of
    proceedings. Nonetheless I accepted a copy of that note and he  pointed
    out that when asked why she did not claim asylum she gave the answer "I
    didn't know about it when first came shortly after  arriving  I  met  a
    lady in church started to talk to me and I released everything and told
    her, nothing about the rape, but told about how living and she told  me
    how to make a claim." Her position was that she denied that her  sister
    told her. The record of  proceedings  in  the  file  record  a  similar
    response save that there was an earlier question "Aware sister  claimed
    asylum here? The answer given was "yes" and was followed by the  answer
    recorded in counsels note. I do not consider that there is any material
    difference in the notes of evidence as the answer to the question as to
    whether she was aware her sister claimed asylum did not specify at what
    point she became aware.

36. I have therefore considered with care the submissions in light  of  the
    evidence before the Tribunal and the overall decision  reached.  Having
    done so, I am not satisfied that there  was  any  material  mistake  of
    fact.

37. Mr Holmes has referred to one part of paragraph 25 but in  my  judgment
    the whole of paragraph 25 and the preceding paragraph 24 are  relevant.
    At paragraph 24, the panel  referred  to  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant concerning the circumstances in which the appellant  came  to
    the United Kingdom, it being common ground that  she  applied  for  two
    visit visas when living in Jamaica. The panel set out  the  appellant's
    evidence that she claimed to have found her sister's  details  (another
    sister in the UK) at the bottom of her bag and contacted her  who  then
    paid for her ticket. Given the lapse of time, the panel did not  accept
    that the contact details of her sister would have come to  light  after
    so long. It is therefore plain that they did not believe her account as
    to the circumstances by which she came to the UK.

38. Paragraph 25 made reference to the timing  of  the  asylum  claim.  The
    panel stated as follows:-

         "The timing of the asylum claim is relevant in terms  of  assessing
         credibility. The appellant had already sought two visit visas  (one
         successful, one not) and had at least one family member in  the  UK
         who would have gone through the asylum process. The appellant  knew
         before she arrived in the UK about a sister having made such  claim
         - an obvious person to ask. We do not find the appellant's  account
         wholly credible."

39. The factual background to that finding was that the appellant's  sister
    was granted leave to remain on or  about  10  September  2014.  Shortly
    thereafter the appellant made an application for a  visit  Visa  on  12
    March 2015, having obtained a passport  in  February  2015,  which  was
    refused on 13 March. She made a second application on 22  January  2018
    which was successful and she entered the UK on 29 January 2018 but  did
    not claim asylum until the 5 June 2018.

40. It was therefore open to the panel to take into account the  timing  of
    the asylum claim in the context of her immigration history as  a  whole
    and the application to  visit  visas.  The  panel  inferred  from  this
    history that as the appellant had applied to  the  UK  authorities  for
    visit visas and had a family member who had  gone  through  the  asylum
    process, that  the  appellant  would  have  known  about  applying  for
    protection when she had entered United Kingdom on the same  basis,  but
    did not do so until June 2018.

41. Whilst Mr Holmes states that the panel failed to take  account  of  her
    explanation (as set out in his note of evidence), paragraph 25 needs to
    be read alongside paragraph 24 and also paragraph 31  where  the  panel
    stated that they did not accept the reason given for the delay  between
    the incidents and the claim for asylum and that they also rejected  the
    explanation given for  delaying  the  asylum  claim  once  in  the  UK.
    Paragraph 31 is an  omnibus  conclusion  on  the  issue  of  delay  and
    therefore the appellant's claimed lack of knowledge. The panel rejected
    her explanation for the delay on the basis of immigration history,  the
    application made for two visit visas and that her sister who  she  knew
    was in the UK before she came (whether or not she claimed  asylum)  had
    been the "obvious person to ask". Consequently I am not satisfied  that
    there was any mistake of fact.

42. Even if the panel had accepted her explanation, this was only one of  a
    number of findings of fact and the panel did  not  dismiss  the  appeal
    based on this finding. Furthermore, where the panel stated that in  the
    alternative  that  they  considered   the  claim  at  its  highest,  at
    paragraph 28 onwards, the issue of delay in claiming asylum  played  no
    part in their assessment where the panel found that there was  no  risk
    on return at the date of the hearing for the  reasons  given.  Even  if
    there had been a mistake of fact it was not material to the outcome.

Ground 4:

43. Ground 4 asserts of the panel applied the  wrong  standard  proof.  The
    written grounds base the submission on paragraph 27 where the  Tribunal
    panel use the word "uncertain" and submit that the panel were  imposing
    a higher threshold than that of a "reasonable likelihood."

44. In his oral submissions Mr Holmes also made reference to  paragraph  24
    where the panel referred to "struggle to accept" and paragraph 25 where
    the panel stated  "we  do  not  find  the  appellant's  account  wholly
    credible."

45. Ms Petterson on behalf of  the  respondent  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response and that  the  panel  had  made  a  proper  self-direction  at
    paragraph 9. She also relied upon the panel having taken the  claim  at
    its highest (from paragraph 28 onwards).

46. I have carefully considered the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. Any decision of a First-tier Tribunal should be  read  as  a
    whole and when doing so here it is plain in my judgment that the  panel
    were aware of the correct standard of proof. They set out as a separate
    self-direction paragraph 9 and made reference  to  expressly  directing
    themselves to the lower standard  of  proof  which  was  a  "reasonable
    likelihood", and I am satisfied that they also  applied  that  approach
    when making the factual assessment overall. Whilst the  grounds  centre
    on paragraph 25, I would accept that the use of the word "uncertain" is
    unfortunate but that does  not  undermine  the  whole  of  the  factual
    assessment made by the panel. I can see no error in the  panel  stating
    that they did not find the appellant's account to be "wholly  credible"
    as they identify both before and after paragraph 25 why they have found
    that be the case.

47. Furthermore as Ms Patterson has pointed out, even if it could  be  said
    that paragraph 25 was in error, in the light of the  panel  taking  the
    appellant's case at its highest, the panel went on to give adequate and
    sustainable reasons for reaching  their  findings  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk of harm on the basis of the  evidence  as  at  the
    date of hearing.

48. The FtTJ had the advantage of seeing and assessing  the  appellant  and
    making an  assessment  of  both  the  oral  and  the  written  evidence
    presented on her behalf, including the  evidence  of  her  sister.  The
    judgment of Lady Hale in AH (Sudan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2007] UKHL 49, [2008]  AC  678  emphasises  this  issue  at
    paragraph 31:

         "...This is an expert tribunal charged with administering a complex
         area of law in challenging circumstances. To paraphrase a view I
         have expressed about such expert tribunals in another context, the
         ordinary courts should approach appeals from them with an
         appropriate degree of caution; it is probable that in understanding
         and applying the law in their specialised field the tribunal will
         have got it right: see Cooke v Secretary of State for Social
         Security[2001] EWCA Civ 734, [2002] 3 All ER 279, para 16. They and
         they alone are the judges of the facts. It is not enough that their
         decision on those facts may seem harsh  to people who have not
         heard and read the evidence and arguments which they have heard and
         read. Their decisions should be respected unless it is quite clear
         that they have misdirected themselves in law. Appellate courts
         should not rush to find such mis directions simply because they
         might have reached a different conclusion on the facts or expressed
         themselves differently."

49. In my judgment, the grounds relied upon do  not  demonstrate  that  the
    panel failed to properly consider  the  evidence  before  them  and  in
    summary, the assessment made was one reasonably open to  the  panel  on
    the  evidence,  both  oral  and  documentary,  and  it  has  not   been
    demonstrated that the decision of the panel involved the making  of  an
    error on a point of law. Therefore the decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    shall stand.

Notice of Decision

50. The decision of the panel did not involve the making of an error  on  a
    point of law; the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 3/9/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



