
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13683/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ Belfast                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 19 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     S H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brennan, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox promulgated on 24 April 2019 dismissing her
    appeal against a decision of the respondent made on 15 December 2017 to
    refuse her asylum and human rights claim.

 2. In summary the appellant's case is that she and her husband were Coptic
    Christians, that her husband had been accused of  converting  a  Salafi
    Muslim woman to Christianity in Egypt and that  this  had  resulted  in
    threats and attacks on the family as  a  result.   The  appellant  fled
    Egypt with her children, travelling to the United  Kingdom,  but  later
    lost contact with her husband.

 3. The Secretary of State's case is set out in the  refusal  letter  which
    sets out in significant detail why it is that the  Secretary  of  State
    did not believe the account given either as  to  the  difficulties  the
    appellant had faced as a Coptic Christian prior to  the  incident  with
    the Salafi family or that incident having taken place.

 4. The appeal was heard on 19 October 2018 but as is obvious the  decision
    was only promulgated some six months later.   There  is  no  indication
    that there was a significant delay between the signing of the  decision
    and the promulgation.

 5. The judge sets out over a number of passages from [25] onwards  why  he
    does not accept the appellant's account and several passages  in  that,
    particularly at paragraphs [25] and  [38],  the  judge  refers  to  the
    evidence  being  vague  and  evasive  and  finally  at  paragraph  [49]
    concludes that the appellant's  account  is  a  fabrication.   He  also
    concludes the appellant is an economic migrant, notes  her  failure  to
    claim asylum in France and then at [51]  and  [52]  makes  observations
    with regard to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 drawing, it would appear, inferences adverse to the  appellant
    from the fact that her presence would not be desirable on  that  basis.
    Paragraph [52] ends:

         "I am satisfied that Section 117  be  applied  to  the  Appellant's
         situation and that removal protocol should be engaged."

 6. The judge then makes findings with regard to Section 8 of the 2004 Act.
     He then goes on to address asylum under the  1951  Act,  again  making
    reference to the appellant's credibility not being something  that  can
    be relied upon at paragraph [59], then making comments at  [61]  as  to
    the  availability  of  protection  and  the  possibility  of   internal
    relocation.  In particular, at [61] the judge says that  the  appellant
    was able to safely relocate to Cairo on the evidence before him.   That
    however would appear to be inconsistent with what the evidence  was  at
    [45].

 7. Finally the judge concludes  at  paragraph  [87]  that  there  were  no
    substantial grounds for believing that the appellant, described as  he,
    faces a real risk of suffering serious harm on return to Iraq.

 8. Permission to appeal was sought on two relatively narrow grounds.

      i) that at paragraphs [51] and [52] of the decision the  n  Judge  had
         considered the impact of Section 117 of the 2002 Act in the context
         of an asylum claim which  was  inappropriate  and  in  taking  this
         irrelevant material into the overall assessment of evidence in  the
         round, the decision was flawed.

     ii) That the judge wrongly referred to the appellant not facing harm in
         Iraq whereas she is in fact from Egypt; and, the  six  month  delay
         between the hearing and the promulgation of the decision  indicated
         that the judge had not a sufficient recollection on  the  basis  of
         the appeal.

 9. I deal first with the paragraphs [51] and  [52].   Whilst  observations
    with regard to Section 117 are relevant in considering a  human  rights
    appeal and indeed in consideration of family and private life the judge
    must have regard to the factors set out in Section 117B,  they  do  not
    however have a place in assessing credibility  in  the  context  of  an
    asylum claim.  Mr Govan submits that these paragraphs can in effect  be
    severed from the decision, the error here being one of structure rather
    than the taking into account of irrelevant matters.

10. It is, I consider, important to look at these paragraphs in the context
    of the decision as a whole.  There is at [52] a clear concentration  on
    issues of the appellant being a drain  on  the  public  purse  and  her
    integration into society would be hampered, all of which  are  negative
    factors.  These are consistent with the finding that the  appellant  is
    an economic migrant at paragraph  [50]  and  the  somewhat  unfortunate
    stock paragraph at paragraph [49] that again emphasises that issue.  As
    Mr Govan submitted, there are a large number  of  credibility  findings
    which have not been directly challenged and to  which  I  have  already
    referred.  As against that the structure of the decision is  such  that
    paragraphs  [51]  and  [52]  clearly  play  a  part   in   the   asylum
    consideration because the judge then goes on to deal with Section 8  of
    the 2004 Act within paragraph [53] and clearly at [59]  relies  on  the
    reasons set out above when assessing the credibility of  the  appellant
    in the context of making findings under the 1951 Convention.

11. It is I consider necessary before reaching a definitive  conclusion  on
    ground 1 to look at the grounds as a whole which involves consideration
    of ground 2.

12. I consider there is no merit in  the  submission  with  regard  to  the
    reference to Iraq.  This is clearly a paragraph  which  has  just  been
    copied and pasted in from another determination as appears  to  be  the
    case  with  a  large  part  of  this  decision  which  contains   stock
    paragraphs.  The reference to Iraq I consider  is  simply  unfortunate.
    It is not evidence that the judge was confused as to the  country.   It
    is the only mention of that country and it is clear from the context of
    the decision that he refers to Egypt at all other times.

13. It is not of course an error of law for a decision to be promulgated or
    to be written months after the hearing.  That is because it is  not  an
    error of law to issue a decision so long after the hearing.   But  that
    is not to say that a delay of as long as six months is not relevant  in
    assessing a decision.  That  is,  I  consider,  particularly  the  case
    whereas here the judge has relied on  a  recollection  of  evidence  he
    describes being evasive and vague.

14. Taking the grounds together and looking at the decision as  a  whole  I
    consider that the  judge's  reference  to  paragraphs  51  and  52  was
    material when combined with the delay and the reliance  on  descriptors
    of evidence such as vague, evasive and lacking in detail.

15. I have considered whether these errors were material given the  judge's
    reference to the appellant's ability to relocate to an area  where  she
    would be safe but that was not a true consideration of the case  taking
    it at its highest because  as  I  have  already  said  the  appellant's
    evidence was that they were traced to Cairo and so it cannot be said in
    that the errors to which I have already alluded were immaterial.

16. Accordingly, for these reasons I conclude  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and I set it
    aside.  I consider on this case,  given  that  the  errors  go  to  the
    findings on credibility, that the matter must be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing de novo  and  for  the  avoidance  of
    doubt none of the findings of fact reached by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    are preserved.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
    on the issue of dependency between the appellant and the sponsor.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 17 December 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
