
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13597/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2019                   |On 01 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     AF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Grubb instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 21  September  1977.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 12 December 2007 and  claimed  asylum.
    That claim was refused on 23 December 2011.  He did not appeal.

 3. On 13 July 2016, the appellant was convicted at the Cardiff Crown Court
    of the offence of possessing with intent to supply a controlled drug of
    Class B, namely cannabis.  On 8 August 2016 he was sentenced to  twelve
    months' imprisonment.

 4. As a result of that conviction, the appellant was notified on 12 August
    2016 that the  respondent  intended  to  deport  him  pursuant  to  the
    automatic deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007.

 5. On 31 March 2017, further representations were made on  behalf  of  the
    appellant seeking to resist his deportation including the  impact  upon
    him of deportation to Iran as he had been diagnosed with HIV.

 6. On 5 December 2017, the appellant's human rights claim was refused  and
    on that date a deportation order was made against him.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 19 April 2018, Judge N  J  Osborne  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  He rejected the  appellant's  account  that  he
    would be at risk on return to Iran because of his political activities.
     Further, he dismissed the appellant's claim to be at risk as a  result
    of his conviction for a drug offence in the  UK.   Finally,  the  judge
    rejected the appellant's reliance upon  Arts  3  and  8  of  the  ECHR,
    including on the basis that he would lack available treatment on return
    to Iran.

 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  That appeal  was  listed
    before me on 27 November 2018.  At that hearing, no challenge was  made
    to the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's asylum  claim  based
    upon his political activities.  Likewise, no challenge was  brought  to
    the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Arts 3 and
    8 of the ECHR.

 9. Instead, the appellant relied solely on the ground that the  judge  had
    failed properly to consider the risk to him on return to Iran from  the
    Iranian authorities based upon his claim that they  would  investigate,
    detain and seriously ill-treat him because of his drugs  conviction  in
    the UK in  order  to  ascertain  whether  his  drug  dealings  had  any
    connection with Iran and whether he would be guilty of an offence under
    Art 4 of the Iranian Penal Code.

10. In that regard, the appellant relied principally upon an expert  report
    prepared by a well-known expert, Dr Kakhki.

11. In my decision sent on 13 December 2018, I concluded that the judge had
    failed properly to consider Dr Kakhki's report dealing with the risk to
    the appellant on return as a result of his drugs conviction in the UK.

12. As a consequence, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.   The
    judge's findings and conclusions that had not  been  challenged  stood.
    However, the appeal would be re-listed for a further hearing  in  order
    for this Tribunal to remake the decision in respect  of  the  risk,  if
    any, to the appellant on return to Iran as a result of  his  conviction
    for a drugs offence in the UK.

13. That appeal was relisted  on  24  January  2019  before  me.   At  that
    hearing, the appellant was represented by Ms C Grubb and the respondent
    by Mrs H Aboni.

The Issues

14. The appellant's case may be summarised as follows.   First,  he  has  a
    conviction in the UK for drug dealing, namely the  supply  of  Class  B
    drugs.   That  conviction,  and  its  context,  was   reported   in   a
    "Walesonline.co.uk."  news  report.   Secondly,   as   a   result   the
    appellant's conviction will become known to  the  Iranian  authorities.
    Thirdly, the circumstances of his drugs offence will be investigated in
    Iran by the authorities on his return under the so -  called  principle
    of "universal jurisdiction" found in Art.4 of the Iranian Penal Code as
    to whether his offending amounted to an offence within Iran as part  of
    a "wider drug  smuggling  network"  from  Iran.   Fourthly,  and  as  a
    consequence, the appellant is at risk of being  detained  in  order  to
    carry out that investigation which, even if it does  not  lead  to  any
    prosecution because his offending has no connection with Iran, he is at
    risk  of   serious   ill-treatment   including   torture   during   the
    investigation process by the Iranian authorities  and  is  at  risk  of
    being ill-treated by the non-availability  (or  deliberate  withholding
    of) necessary drugs  to  deal  with  his  HIV  infection  whilst  being
    detained.

15. In support of the appellant's claim, Ms Grubb relied  upon  the  expert
    report of Dr Kakhki and submitted that each  step  in  the  appellant's
    case is established factually and that, therefore,  he  is  at  serious
    risk of ill-treatment amounting to persecution entitling him to refugee
    status or serious harm entitling him to humanitarian  protection  under
    para 339C(iii) read with para 339CA of the Immigration Rules  (HC  395)
    or which would be contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

16. In addition to Dr Kakhki's report, Ms Grubb relied  upon  a  number  of
    background documents contained in the appellant's bundle, in particular
    the "Special Rapporteur's March 2013 report on the situation  of  human
    rights in Iran" (13 March 2013) at pages 50  -  75,  in  particular  at
    pages 56 and 57; and the Freedom from Torture (UK),  "Turning  a  blind
    eye: why the international community must no longer ignore  torture  in
    Iran" (9 December 2017) at pages 234 - 262, especially at page 250; and
    the Mianeh (Institute for War and Peace Reporting),  "HIV/AIDS  -  more
    than a social taboo" (26 February 2009) at pages 231 - 232.

17. Mrs Aboni accepted that, as Judge Osborne  decided,  that  the  Iranian
    authorities  would  investigate  the  appellant  under  that  country's
    "universal jurisdiction" in  relation  to  drugs  offences.   She  also
    accepted, in her submissions, that the Iranian authorities may find out
    about his offence.  However, Ms Aboni submitted that it  had  not  been
    established,  either  by  reference  to  the  expert's  report  or  the
    background material,  that  the  appellant  would  face  conditions  of
    sufficient severity to require international protection.  She  accepted
    that the background evidence showed that  present  conditions  in  Iran
    were "harsh" but it had not been established the  extent  of  time  for
    which he would be detained, how prolonged the interrogation would be or
    what techniques would be used.  She accepted that there would  be  some
    questioning but not  that  it  would  be  of  a  sufficient  length  or
    intensity to reach the Art 3 threshold.  She relied upon the fact  that
    the appellant's drugs offence was that of a street level  offender  who
    had been caught in possession of 60 wraps of  cannabis.   That  is  all
    that would be disclosed by the online news report which  was  not  such
    that he could be said to have played a  significant  part  in  a  wider
    drugs operation.

18. In response to an enquiry from me, Mrs Aboni was not in a  position  to
    indicate what, if anything, the UK authorities would  disclose  to  the
    Iranian authorities when deporting the appellant.  She  indicated  that
    she was not aware of any evidence  that  the  British  authorities  did
    confirm the details of a deported offender's convictions.

Discussion and Findings

19. The crucial section in Dr Kakhki's report which is relied upon is found
    at pages  205  -  206  of  the  bundle.   It  deals  with  the  Iranian
    authorities' interest in returning drugs offenders  and  (specifically)
    their interest in the  appellant  as  a  result  of  the  Wales  online
    publication and the impact upon them (and the appellant)  if  detained.
    His report is in the following terms:

         "In the case at hand, it is not clear from the background  material
         provided that whether there was  a  connection  between  the  drugs
         found in [the appellant's] possession and his  country  of  origin,
         Iran: i.e. whether Iran was the source or transfer point for  those
         drugs to the UK.  As mentioned, Article 4 of the Iranian Penal Code
         stipulates that, "if a part of a crime occurs in Iran,  but  it  is
         completed outside of the country or part of the crim  is  committed
         abroad and the consequences are observed in Iran, it is  considered
         as a crime committed inside Iran."  Therefore, as  [the  appellant]
         drug dealing may have been connected to Iran it  is  possible  that
         his crime would be investigated again by the Iranian authorities to
         establish whether he is guilty of an  offence of a different nature
         to that for which he was convicted in the UK.  This is particularly
         the case is it is apparent from  the  background  information  that
         [the appellant's] status in the UK  has  been  discussed  with  the
         Iranian authorities and a passport has  been  issued  in  order  to
         facilitate his removal (comments  on CPP control case -  23/12/16).
         In  my  opinion  this  would  be  likely  to  result   in   further
         investigation in Iran if  he  is  returned.   Crimes  such  as  the
         possession and distribution of illicit substances in the UK may  be
         relevant to the Iranian authorities when establishing whether  [the
         appellant] is part of a wide drug smuggling network  involving  the
         transfer or export of illegal drugs from Iran.  In any event,  [the
         appellant's] criminal conviction is a matter of  public  record  in
         the UK, and easily accessible by the Iranian authorities who gather
         information about Iranian citizens  through  the  use  of  internet
         sources:

             Asylum  seeker  jailed  after  being  caught  trying  to  sell
             cannabis to young people

             A drug-dealing asylum seeker who said  he  had  to  flee  Iran
             after speaking out against the government has been jailed  for
             trying to sell cannabis on the streets of Cardiff.

             [The appellant] left Iran in 2007 and was taken to  a  refugee
             centre in Cardiff after arriving in the UK.

             But a judge told him his crime - which  came  about  after  he
             began using drugs himself - had "done a  real  disservice"  to
             other potential asylum seekers hoping to come to this country.

             Referring to his move to the UK, defence  barrister  Sebastian
             Winnett told  the  court:  "The  regime  was  after  him.   He
             attended protests and was a vocal voice against the government
             there."...

             ... Sentencing, Judge Rhys Rowlands told the 38-year-old,  who
             was convicted last month of possession with intent to supply a
             class B drug, that he was a "street-level drug dealer" who had
             targeted young people in the centre of Cardiff late at night.

             "Having been  allowed  to  remain  [in  the  UK]  you  behaved
             illegally."  The judge added.  "In doing so you  have  done  a
             real disservice to others who seek a future on these shores."

             He was given a 12-month prison sentence.  The drugs which were
             found in his possession have been ordered to be destroyed.

             [The appellant] who worked as a cab driver in  Iran,  saw  his
             refugee  status  expire  in  January  this   year,   and   his
             application to renew it will be determined  now  he  has  been
             sentenced.

         Such negative coverage  would  certainly,  in  my  view,  draw  the
         attention of the Iranian security forces who would investigate [the
         appellant's]  possible  criminal  connections  in  Iran  if  he  is
         returned.  The effect of such an investigation would  be  prolonged
         detention in poor conditions, with denial of  medical  care,  which
         may result  in  the  deterioration  of  his  health  condition,  as
         detailed in section one of this report."

20. Turning to "section one" of the report referred to by Dr Kakhki in  the
    final paragraph and, in particular those parts relied upon by Ms Grubb,
    Dr Kakhki deals both  with  the  ill-treatment  of  detainees  and  the
    particular position of those suffering from HIV.

21. As regards the former, Dr Kakhki says this at pages 192-193:

         "With regard to the general use of torture and in order to  form  a
         holistic understanding of the use of physical pressure  within  the
         investigative process,  it  is  necessary  to  review  the  Iranian
         security services' rationale and goals behind using  such  methods.
         The most  prevalent  rationale  for  the  use  of  torture  is  the
         acquisition  of  information,  yielding  either  self-incriminating
         details or those that would incriminate the subject's  accomplices.
         The   latter   information   could   subsequently   be   used   for
         investigations  into  the  accomplices'  crimes,  using  the   same
         methods.

         In addition to procuring general information about  the  detainee's
         activities, the routine use of torture is  oftentimes  intended  to
         procure written and even televised confessions.   Records  of  such
         confessions  are  then  admissible  within  court  proceedings   as
         evidence of the  subject's  guilt.   Furthermore,  even  where  the
         subject consequently  denies,  while  at  court,  having  made  the
         confession while in detention and alleges  that  torture  has  been
         used for procuring it, the proceeding  judge  nonetheless  has  the
         discretion to consider the denied confession as evidence of  guilt.
         The account below highlights the use of torture for such  purposes,
         in the case of student activists' detention:

             Following two visits with their  sons,  the  families  alleged
             that authorities have subjected them to 24-hour  interrogation
             sessions,  sleep  deprivation,  and  threats  of  harming  the
             prisoners and their families.  The families also said that the
             detainees had been confined in cells with dangerous  convicted
             prisoners, beaten and with cables and  fists,  and  forced  to
             remain standing for long periods of time.

             "Reports that Iranian authorities have beaten  and  threatened
             these students to obtain confessions are  all  too  consistent
             with accounts we have collected in the past," said Joe  Stork,
             deputy Middle East and North Africa director at  Human  Rights
             Watch.  "The government should release these 19  students  and
             activists immediately."

         It is also noteworthy that even in the aforementioned circumstances
         of a complaint having been made regarding torture, it is very  rare
         for any practical measures to be ordered by the judge in  order  to
         remedy the situation and halt the ill treatment.  Consequently, the
         effectiveness of torture is increased, in  the  perception  of  the
         authorities, due to the  lack  of  punishment  for  the  physically
         abusive  security  personnel  and  the  admissibility  of   coerced
         confession in court hearings,  even  where  the  subject  complains
         about the treatment incurred.

         In light of the wide variety of circumstances in which  torture  is
         routinely used, as highlighted above, it is unsurprising  that  the
         Iranian legal system, instead of condemning  torture,  condones  it
         within some contexts.  The Iranian courts believe that the  use  of
         'torture' is legal under the Islamic Punishment Law.   Specifically
         they define the law and practice as "Tazir", which allows the judge
         to order a number of lashes or any other form of  treatment  toward
         the subject in order to gain information about the crime.

         As the result of the Judiciary's lack of action  over  torture  and
         its  implicit  condoning  of  its  use,  as  described  above,  the
         utilisation of physical pressure and force during interrogations is
         a routine method of investigation that is used when a wide  variety
         of subjects are being interrogated.  For instance, as  the  use  of
         torture may be an effective means  of  ensuring  self-incrimination
         through confessions and consequently a decrease  in  the  time  and
         effort  required   of   the   security   services   for   gathering
         incriminating evidence, its use is not limited to those  prosecuted
         for political crimes."

22. As regards any impact upon him as an HIV sufferer, Dr Kakhki says  this
    at page 176:

         "Therefore, in my opinion, the availability of medication and  care
         for [the appellant] if returned to Iran  should  be  considered  in
         light of the overall situation in the country  regarding  the  poor
         socio-economic conditions for parts of  the  population  especially
         those who are of low-income, have no  proper  support  from  family
         members, live in remote areas, have an illness which is stigmatised
         etc., as well as the impact of many years of sanctions  on  medical
         supplies.  It should also be considered that  the  availability  of
         specialist treatment such as for HIV in prisons is very limited  if
         not non-existent, and  the  regime  has  a  history  of  denial  of
         necessary/urgent  medical  care  in  order  to  apply  pressure  on
         detainees."

23. Dr Kakhki then deals further with this aspect of the appellant's  claim
    at page 186 as follows:

         "I believe  it  is  important  to  consider  the  above  background
         evidence when evaluating [the appellant's] level of risk on  return
         to Iran and availability of medical care of his ailment.  As he  is
         suffering  from  an  incurable  disease  and  has  been  prescribed
         medication, availability of medical treatment and continued  supply
         of any medication cannot be guaranteed if he is returned  to  Iran;
         indeed, as will be discussed further,  withholding  such  mediation
         and assistance  may  be  a  tactic  used  to  compel  a  detainee's
         cooperation with the authorities as well  as  to  persecuting  them
         further  which  may  be  relevant  to  the  circumstances  of  [the
         appellant's] case.

         For the sake if completeness, it  is  also  worth  mentioning  that
         across Islamic jurisdictions, there  is  a  strict  approach  taken
         towards those suffering from HIV  or  any  other  serious  sexually
         transmitted  diseases.   It  is  even  the  case   that   in   some
         jurisdictions for example the UAE, it is a criminal offence  to  be
         affected by one  of  these  diseases  and  the  offender  would  be
         arrested and imprisoned as a result of their illness.   Whilst  the
         Iranian government has had a more pragmatic approach within Iranian
         society, HIV is still regarded as taboo, sufferers are  stigmatised
         due to connotations with sexual promiscuity and  homosexuality,  in
         addition to the  growing  association  of  the  disease  with  drug
         addicts."

24. At page 180, Dr Kakhki specifically identified a  "general  policy"  of
    denying those under investigation medical care:

         "As is clear from the above account  Iranian  authorities  use  the
         medical conditions of detainees to their own advantage as  a  means
         to exert pressure on them  to  confess  during  investigations  and
         after sentencing as a  form  of  additional  arbitrary  punishment.
         Therefore, if a failed asylum seeker is arrested on return to  Iran
         due to their illegal departure, or any other reason they  may  face
         the prospect of being denied medical care  especially  due  to  the
         general  policy  employed  by  the  security  forces   during   the
         investigation.  This situation, in my  opinion,  is  likely  to  be
         applicable to the circumstances of [the appellant's] case."

25.  The  background  material  to  which  Ms  Grubb  referred  me  clearly
    identifies the "widespread use of torture" in respect of detainees (see
    the Special Rapporteur's report at pages 56 - 57).

26. The Freedom from Torture document also identifies the risk to those who
    are detained of being tortured (see for example pages 245 onwards).  At
    page 250, the latter report,  consistently  with  Dr  Kakhki's  report,
    records the denial of medical attention in detention as follows:

         "Medical attention

         Most people did not receive medical attention  while  in  detention
         (47, 68%).  Of the 22 who did  (32%),  most  were  treated  in  the
         detention facility, though in  some  cases  this  was  provided  at
         clinics or hospitals outside.

         The majority of people had no access to  medical  attention  during
         detention (47, 68%), and of those who  did,  most  required  urgent
         medical attention to treat injuries arising from torture.

         In 21 of the 22 cases, medical  attention  was  required  to  treat
         injuries arising from torture, including  cuts,  burns,  fractures,
         suspected internal bleeding,  paraplegia,  testicular  torsion  and
         gangrene.   Two  individuals  reported  that  wounds  arising  from
         torture were sutured with  no  anaesthetic  and  another  described
         doctors being forbidden to answer any of their questions  following
         an operation."

27. That report also deals at pages 250 - 252 with the incidents of torture
    during interrogation noting that:

         "over three-quarters of people  described  being  interrogated  and
         tortured  concurrently  (54,  78%),  either  during  all  or   some
         incidences of torture."

    It continues:

         "people reported that  interrogation  under  torture  was  used  to
         attempt to extract information about them, as well as third parties
         including family and friends (44, 64%)."

    And then, it states that:

         "attempts to force a confession, often under torture or  threat  of
         future torture, were also commonly reported (35, 51%)."

28. At pages 251 - 252 the  report  deals  with  detention  conditions  and
    duration of detention as follows:

         "Detention conditions

         Adequate accommodation, sanitation, and personal hygiene, provision
         of food and water and appropriate separation of detainees  are  set
         out in the Nelson Mandela Rules.  [44] analysis  of  the  69  cases
         indicates that these standards were largely unmet.

         The majority of people  were  detained  in  very  poor  conditions,
         including in small or overcrowded cells, with little or  no  access
         to  adequate  food  or  water  and  restricted  access  to   toilet
         facilities.

         Cells

         More than half reported being kept in cramped conditions in a small
         cell (35,51%), for example rooms measuring 2 x 1 metres or rooms so
         small that there was only space to squat or stand.  A small  number
         were held in overcrowded cells, which were unsanitary  and  had  no
         room to lie down.  Many described bare rooms, with no furniture  or
         bedding and some remarked on temperature change in their cell,  for
         example extremes by time of day or season.

         Access to food and water

         A significant  proportion  of  people  in  the  case  set  reported
         inadequate access to food (30, 43%), with irregular meals only, for
         example once a day or every other  day.   Food  was  often  of  low
         nutritional value and poor quality  (e.g.  meals  of  stale  bread,
         rice, cheese or potatoes) and in some cases mouldy or contaminated,
         sometimes leaving people unable to eat.  A small number were  given
         no food at all.  Some described  inadequate  daily  allocations  of
         water or being forced to drink unsanitary  or  contaminated  water.
         At least three people had no access to water at all.




         Sanitation

         Twenty-eight people reported restricted access to toilet facilities
         (41%).  Of these, some described being made to wait to  go  to  the
         toilet for extended periods, sometimes forcing them to  urinate  or
         defecate in their cells.  A small number were not given access to a
         toilet at all.  Over a third of people described highly  unhygienic
         conditions (24, 35%).  Including cells being kept  constantly  wet;
         foul smells such as faeces,  urine  and  blood;  heavy  soiling  in
         overcrowded cells, and infestations of vermin.

         Exposure to violence from other detainees

         A small number of people reported exposure to violence  from  other
         detainees (3, 4%).  For example, one person reported being tattooed
         by other detainees while they were unable to move, and one woke  to
         find another detainee attacking them with a sharp blade.

         Duration of detention

         As Figure 9 shows, most people were detained for less than a  month
         but a number were detained for longer periods.   Four  people  were
         detained over very long periods (6%), of more than four years.   In
         five cases, detail on length of the most recent detention  was  not
         available in the medico-legal report.

         Circumstances of release or escape

         The majority of  people  were  granted  some  form  of  conditional
         release upon the guarantee of various bail  conditions  (42,  61%),
         the most common being payment of surety (22, 32%),  which  in  many
         cases involved putting up the deeds to the family home or business;
         being forced to sign a declaration regarding future  behaviour  (or
         other unseen documents) as a condition of  release  (20,  29%),  or
         being put  under  reporting  restrictions  (9,  13%).   Other  bail
         conditions were reported in a small number of  cases,  for  example
         handing over a family member suspected of anti-government activity,
         payment of fines, travel bans, bans on entry  to  higher  education
         and vans on employment in public services.

         Nine individuals  escaped  (13%),  seven  without  assistance,  for
         example from  a  hospital  where  they  had  been  transferred  for
         treatment, or while being transferred to court or another place  of
         detention. The remaining  two  escaped  with  the  assistance  from
         family members who were able to bribe guards or security officials.
          A further nine reported being released without explanation  (13%),
         for  example  they  were  taken   from   the   detention   facility
         unexpectedly and without information,  and  driven  to  a  location
         where they were released, or in some cases dumped unconscious in an
         unknown location.  Three people were released unconditionally (4%),
         either for lack of evidence or after serving prison time.   In  six
         cases, there was no detail in the medico-legal report  relating  to
         the circumstances of release."

29. Judge Osborne accepted, on the basis of Dr Kakhki's  report,  that  the
    appellant  would  be  investigated  under  the  Iranian  so  -   called
    "universal jurisdiction".  Mrs Aboni,  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,
    accepted that to be the case.  I see no reason  to  depart  from  Judge
    Osborne's finding on  this  issue  which  is  wholly  supported  by  Dr
    Kakhki's report.  There is a real  risk  that  the  appellant's  drug's
    offence in the UK will, as a  result  of  the  online  report  and  the
    Iranian authorities' monitoring of the internet, come to the  attention
    of the Iranian authorities who will seek  to  investigate  under  their
    "universal jurisdiction" whether his offence has an Iranian  connection
    such as to justify his prosecution in Iran.  Dr Kakhki  states  in  his
    opinion that the article would "certainly" draw him to the attention of
    the Iranian security authorities.

30. It is clear to me that Dr Kakhki's conclusion, in that regard,  is  not
    dependent upon his view that the appellant's offending in  the  UK,  in
    itself, suggests a connection with Iran - which it does not.  Mrs Aboni
    was not in a position to contend that  the  British  authorities  would
    inform the  Iranian  authorities  of  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
    offence.  She was not aware of any such practice.  In my earlier  error
    of law decision, at paras [21] - [25] I  explained  that,  contrary  to
    Judge Osborne's view, Dr Kakhki concludes, in the  final  paragraph  of
    his report as set out above, that the appellant would  be  investigated
    whether or not, in fact, the  news  report  on  its  face  suggested  a
    connection with Iran.  Before me, I did not  understand  Mrs  Aboni  to
    contend otherwise.  I find as a fact based upon Dr Kakhki's report that
    there is a real risk  that  the  appellant  will  be  investigated  for
    "possible criminal connections in Iran" if he is returned.

31. The crucial issue, drawn out in the representatives'  submissions,  was
    what would be the consequence to the appellant of that investigation.

32.  Dr  Kakhki's  conclusion  is  self-evident.   He  concludes  that  the
    appellant would be subject to

         "prolonged detention in poor conditions,  with  denial  of  medical
         care,  which  may  result  in  the  deterioration  of  his   health
         condition".

33. His report, as I set out  above,  also  details  the  approach  of  the
    Iranian authorities  when  investigating  individuals  whom  they  have
    detained.  Dr Kakhki's report, together with the  background  evidence,
    establishes in my view a real risk that the appellant would be  subject
    to torture or serious ill-treatment during the course of  investigating
    whether his drugs offence in the UK has an Iranian  connection.   I  do
    not accept Mrs Aboni's submission that there is no evidence  concerning
    how long he would be detained.  Dr Kakhki says that he would be subject
    to "prolonged" detention and the Freedom from Torture Report,  which  I
    set out above, indicates that while "most people were detained for less
    than a month", "a number were detained for  longer  periods"  and  four
    people were detained for "very long periods".  There is  nothing  there
    inconsistent with Dr Kakhki's  opinion  that  the  appellant  would  be
    subject to a "prolonged" period of detention.

34. The circumstances of detention would, indeed, be extremely poor  as  Dr
    Kakhki points out.  That is also supported by the Freedom from  Torture
    Report where it is stated, for example, that:

         "the majority of people were  detained  in  very  poor  conditions,
         including in small or overcrowded cells, with little or  no  access
         to  adequate  food  or  water  and  restricted  access  to   toilet
         facilities."

35. In addition, on the basis of both Dr Kakhki's report and the background
    material, I find that  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the  appellant's
    circumstance in detention will be  seriously  exacerbated  by  his  HIV
    status and there is real risk that he will  be  denied  access  to  any
    treatment during the period of his detention.

36.  In  relation  to  "persecution"  for  the  purposes  of  the   Refugee
    Convention, I fully bear in mind the definition set out in reg 5 of the
    Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/2525) that the impact must be:

         "sufficiently serious by its nature or repetition as to  constitute
         a severe violation of a basic human right, in  particular  a  right
         from which derogation cannot  be  made  under  Article  15  of  the
         Convention for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  on  Fundamental
         Freedoms".

37. In that regard, Art 3 of the ECHR imposes a prohibition upon:

          "torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".

38. That is  also  the  relevant  definition  of  "serious  harm"  in  para
    339CA(iii) for the purposes of humanitarian protection under para  339C
    of the Immigration Rules.

39. Torture is the "deliberate inhuman treatment causing very  serious  and
    cruel suffering" (Ireland v UK [1978] 2 EHRR 25 at [167].

40. 'Inhuman' or 'degrading'  treatment  is  that  which,  falls  short  of
    torture but cause substantial mental or physical suffering and  reaches
    the "minimum severity" recognised by the Strasbourg Court having regard
    to the

         "duration of the treatment, its physical or mental affects and,  in
         some cases, the sex, age and state of health of the  victim"  (see,
         e.g. Selmouni v France [1999] 29 EHRR 403 at [100]).

41. In my judgment, based  upon  Dr  Kakhki's  report  and  the  background
    evidence  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that there is a real risk  that  during  the  course  of  the
    appellant's investigation under  the  Iranian  authorities'  "universal
    jurisdiction", an aggregation of the risks of  physical  ill-treatment,
    the adverse  conditions  of  detention  and  the  exacerbation  of  his
    suffering due to a denial of medical treatment for  his  HIV,  that  he
    appellant  will  be  subjected  to  torture  or  serious  ill-treatment
    contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

42. That impact, in my judgment, amounts to "persecution" for the  purposes
    of  the  Refugee  Convention,  serious  harm  for   the   purposes   of
    humanitarian protection and an infringement of Art 3 of the ECHR.

43. Ms Grubb invited me to allow the appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds.
    She submitted, albeit briefly, that he was a  member  of  a  particular
    social group ("PSG") as an HIV sufferer.  She did  not  elaborate  upon
    that submission and she did not refer me to any background material  to
    support her submission, in effect, that the appellant fell  within  the
    definition in  reg  6(1)(d)  of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as being part
    of a group which in Iran shared "an innate characteristic, or a  common
    background that cannot  be  changed"  or  which  had  had  a  "distinct
    identity" in Iran.  Whilst there is evidence of the denial  of  medical
    treatment generally to detainees, it is not specific to  HIV  sufferers
    and whether or not the PSG is defined as those requiring  medical  care
    (or more limited to those who are HIV sufferers denied medical care) in
    detention, I am unpersuaded that the limited material before me  which,
    as I have  said  I  was  not  taken  directly  to  on  this  issue,  is
    sufficiently clear to identify a PSG to which the appellant belongs.

44. Nevertheless,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection under para 339C and that his  removal  to  Iran
    would breach Art 3 of the ECHR.

45. Consequently, I allow the appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

46. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    was set aside by my decision sent on 13 December 2018.


47. I remake the decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

48. I allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under  Art  3
    of the ECHR.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            28 February 2019

