
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/13668/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 August 2019                       | On 13 September 2019               |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                                     AKI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, counsel instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chana, promulgated on  11  February  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter on 25 July 2019.

Anonymity

 2. No such direction has been made previously,  however  one  is  set  out
    below because this is a protection matter.



Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 July 2007 and  applied
    for asylum the following day. That claim was refused on 2  August  2007
    and the appellant's appeal against that decision  was  dismissed  on  9
    October 2007. He made three sets of further submissions,  the  last  of
    which was refused in a decision dated 9 November 2018 and which is  the
    subject of this appeal.

 4. The appellant is a  Kurdish  Muslim  from  Kirkuk.  The  basis  of  his
    protection claim is that he fears persecution in Iraq both  because  of
    his father's links to the Ba'ath Party and because he is  suspected  of
    having individual links to terrorist groups such as ISIS and Al  Qaeda.
    In refusing that claim, the Secretary of State referred to  the  appeal
    determination dated 9 October 2017, wherein the judge  did  not  accept
    that the appellant's father was  a  member  of  the  Ba'ath  Party.  In
    addition, the respondent referred to the  refusal  of  the  appellant's
    earlier submissions on 3 September 2015 when his claim that he  was  at
    risk in Iraq due to the general country situation was rejected with  it
    being decided that he could be removed to Baghdad.  The  appellant  was
    said to have provided no evidence to suggest that he  had  any  imputed
    links to terrorist groups or why he would be seen to have  such  links.
    The Secretary of State did not accept  that  the  appellant  could  not
    return to Kirkuk or that this would breach  his  rights  under  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive. The respondent  stated  that  the
    appellant had failed to show that he had attempted to  obtain  a  Civil
    Status Identity document (CSID) from the Iraqi embassy  in  the  United
    Kingdom or provided evidence to suggest that he was not  in  possession
    of one. Alternatively, it was said that the appellant could  return  to
    either Baghdad or Kirkuk and obtain a CSID there. It was  not  accepted
    that he had no family support in Iraq.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the judge considered the
    sole issue to be the general country situation in Iraq, with  reference
    to the case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)/  AA
    (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944. The judge rejected the appellant's evidence
    as to his family circumstances in Iraq.  She  also  departed  from  the
    Country Guidance case of AA, finding that the situation  had  moved  on
    and Kirkuk was no longer a contested area. The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant could obtain a CSID from Kirkuk and relocate  to  Baghdad  or
    the IKR.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal broadly made the following arguments;

          . that the judge failed to follow the case law of  BA  (Returns  T
            Baghdad Iraq) CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
            internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC).

          . the  judge  failed  to  apply  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  claim
            evidenced by her failure to deal with the proposition  that  the
            appellant may be at risk of serious harm if returned to  Baghdad
            as a young male Sunni returnee, BA applied.

          . there was a failure by the judge to engage with the decision  in
            AAH.

          . The judge's  findings  regarding  relocation  to  the  IKR  were
            unsustainable  because  this  issue  was  not  advanced  by  the
            respondent in the refusal letter

          . The judge's  findings  regarding  the  CSID  were  made  without
            reference to AAH

          . The judge erred in relying  on  the  respondent'  evidence  that
            Kirkuk was no longer a contested territory, contrary to  AA  and
            failed to indicate that she intended to rely on Amin [2017] EWHC
            2417.

          .  The  judge's  findings  were  irrational  and  she  misrecorded
            material aspects of the evidence

          . The judge misdirected herself in finding that the appellant  did
            not seek to rely on Article 8  ECHR  or  paragraph  276  of  the
            Immigration Rules.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

 8. The respondent filed no Rule 24 response.

The hearing

 9. Mr Jones made the following arguments. The judge was  addressed  orally
    and in the skeleton argument about BA and therefore what  she  said  at
    [29] was incorrect, in that she said the only issue was  Article  15(c)
    with reference to AA. The argument had been made that there was a  risk
    to the appellant at the point of reception in Iraq. The judge  did  not
    engage with BA  and  there  was  also  a  lack  of  findings  regarding
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules which was  relevant  given  the  evidence
    that the appellant's family were deceased and that Kirkuk was contested
    territory.  There was no reference to or engagement with the background
    country evidence provided.

10. In relation to  the  third  ground,  it  was  argued  that  there  were
    significant risks to the appellant en route to the  IKR  and  this  was
    just as pertinent on relocation from the capital to Kirkuk.  There  was
    no consideration of that issue and no reference to AAH at  all  in  the
    decision.

11. The judge appeared to suggest the appellant had  a  CSID  which  was  a
    speculative finding. In AAH it was said that a person  must  return  to
    their place of origin whereas the respondent's evidence suggested  that
    it is not know if there is an operative documentation centre in Kirkuk.
    In addition, the judge made no clear finding regarding on  whether  the
    appellant had a male relative to assist, albeit she speculated that his
    friend's family could do so.

12. The judge advocated the appellant's relocation to the IKR  despite  the
    Secretary of State not advocating that and no submission being made  to
    that effect. The judge did not raise this matter in the hearing and she
    did not engage with AAH regarding whether there were any risks  to  the
    appellant. The judge  criticised  the  appellant  for  not  securing  a
    document from the Iraqi authorities but did not consider that he  would
    need a passport, family records or a family member to  vouch  for  him.
    The judge based her findings on the negative  credibility  findings  of
    the previous judge, whereas not every aspect of his claim was  rejected
    including what he said about his family. The judge speculated that  the
    appellant possessed a CSID.

13. Regarding ground six, the judge failed to grapple with AA and failed to
    understand the basis of the case, which is that Kirkuk was a  contested
    area because of volatility, that volatility persisted and ISIS still  a
    feature of this. Instead the judge sought to rely on Amin and  made  no
    decisions on the issues before her.

14. For the respondent, Mr Walker conceded  that  the  judge's  failure  to
    consider AAH was a material error of law. In addition,  the  judge  had
    speculated regarding the appellant's family and  there  was  a  general
    lack of consideration of the evidence provided.

15. At the end of the hearing, I indicated that there were material  errors
    of law in the judge's decision and that it would be set aside, with  no
    findings preserved.

16. Mr Jones indicated that the appellant's preference  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as  there  was  not  a
    fair hearing and no factual findings were to be retained. Owing to  the
    outstanding Country  Guidance  case  which  included  consideration  of
    whether Kirkuk was a contested area, he requested that  the  matter  be
    stayed in the First-tier Tribunal pending the outcome.

Decision on error of law

17. As both parties agreed, the judge's failure  to  follow  an  applicable
    country guidance case or show why  it  does  not  apply  amounts  to  a
    material error of law. In this case, the judge neither referred to  nor
    applied the Country Guidance cases of BA and AAH, despite the  skeleton
    argument produced on behalf of the appellant clearly  relying  on  both
    cases and supplying detailed argument regarding the relevance of  those
    cases.  The judge similarly failed to assess the appellant's Article  8
    claim, both within and outside the Immigration Rules, despite it  being
    flagged up that this aspect of the decision was challenged on the first
    page of the appellant's skeleton argument. The remainder of the  points
    made in the grounds are also made out.

18. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have  an  adequate  consideration  of  his  current  protection,
    humanitarian and human rights' claims at the First-tier Tribunal and it
    would be unfair to deprive him of such consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  with  no  findings
preserved.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 3 hours, by any judge except First-
tier Tribunal Judge Chana.

This matter is to be stayed pending the promulgation of the decision in  the
Country Guidance cases of SMO & Ors (PA/08722/2017) which was heard in  June
2019.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 06 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


