
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13373/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 June 2019                      |On 9 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                  miss k k
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Glass, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Albania  who  made  an  application  for
    international  protection.  It  was  refused,  and  she  appealed   and
    following a hearing at Bradford, and in a decision  promulgated  on  20
    February 2019, Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cox  dismissed  her
    appeal.

 2. The appellant made an application for  permission  to  appeal.  It  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge E M Simpson on 9 April  2019.  Her
    reasons for so granting were: -

         "The appellant born on 21/01/1979, a national of  Albania,  applied
         for permission to appeal, out of time, concerning the  decision  of
         First-tier Judge GM Cox promulgated on  20/02/2019  (the  Decision)
         dismissing the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human
         rights grounds.

         1.   Permission to appeal is granted because:

             (i)  there was materially arguable that the Decision disclosed
             the Judge  having  erred  in  law  when  concluding  that  the
             appellant's relationship  with  her  British  citizen  partner
             together with his presence in Albania were determining factors
             in  the  finding  that  there  was  not  shown  that  she  was
             "vulnerable to or at risk of being re-trafficked" (56),  there
             appearing likely that there was  at  the  fore  the  partner's
             characteristics  of  being  a  male  figure/protector  in  the
             context of Albanian society, but absent of assessment  of  the
             partner's own  potential  for  vulnerability,  including  with
             reference to a mental health history going back 10  years  and
             resulting inability to work, and there  appearing  furthermore
             an absence of addressing his connections with Albania, if from
             Kosovo, notwithstanding evidence disclosed at the  hearing  of
             his deceased mother having had a property in Tirana;

             (ii) having regard to the appellant's agreed history of having
             been a victim of trafficking from Albania to the UK, and basis
             of that trafficking i.e. into prostitution,  combined  with  a
             history of abusive relationships which latterly did not appear
             to have been the subject of challenge, further combined with a
             history of miscarriages since arriving  in  the  UK  in  2015,
             namely in July 2016 and  August  2018,  there  appeared  prima
             facie  arising  from  that  history  evidence  of   a   likely
             vulnerability, of which there was arguable absence of  account
             both when weighing her status as an adult witness  before  the
             court, and in the assessment of risk on  return,  of  which  a
             lack  of  medical  evidence  cited  by  the  Judge  would  not
             reasonably  fall  to  be  determinative   of   her   lack   of
             vulnerability (52).

         2.   Application lodged  out  of  time,  two  weeks.  Given  likely
         importance  of  appeal  to  the  parties  and  having   regard   to
         explanation  provided  by  the  appellant  of  facing  difficulties
         obtaining advice when no longer having legal representatives acting
         for her, it is in the  interests  of  justice  that  discretion  be
         exercised and time extended.

         3.   Arguable error(s) of law disclosed."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. In the First-tier the Presenting Officer acknowledged at the outset  of
    the hearing  that  following  the  NRM  finding,  the  Respondent  also
    effectively accepted that the Appellant genuinely  fears  returning  to
    Albania.  However,  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  that   she   was
    objectively at risk if she returned to Albania now. It  was  argued  by
    the Respondent that the man responsible for trafficking  the  Appellant
    would not have a continuing adverse interest in her and, in any  event,
    would not know that she had returned. Further, and in the  alternative,
    if her trafficker did have an adverse interest in her then in any event
    the authorities could provide sufficient protection.

 5. The Judge went on to apply the factual matrix to relevant case law  and
    the authority of TD and AD (Trafficked women) (CG) v SSHD  [2016]  UKUT
    00092 (IAC). He also considered an expert report  prepared  by  Antonia
    Young in respect of another victim of trafficking  from  Albania.  That
    report was dated  20  February  2018.  The  Judge  considered  comments
    therein in relation to the issue  of  internal  relocation.  The  Judge
    found Ms Young's observations to be consistent with the findings in  TD
    and AD (above). The Judge  considered  additional  background  material
    highlighted by the Appellant's representative. The Judge looked at  the
    Appellant's personal circumstances and concluded at paragraph 42 of his
    decision that on the totality of the evidence  he  was  satisfied  that
    Albanian society would view  the  Appellant  as  having  deviated  from
    tradition and that this is likely to be the main barrier preventing her
    from returning to her family home. He accepted that she would be unable
    to go and live with her parents.

 6. However, the Judge was not satisfied that the Appellant's parents would
    not support her at all. The Judge recorded that the Appellant's parents
    had previously provided her with a roof over her head and that  in  his
    view if the Appellant returned  to  Albania  they  would  provide  some
    support albeit on a discreet basis.

 7. The Judge took account of the Appellant's current  loving  relationship
    with a Mr J M and noted their ultimate wish to marry and have a family.
    The Judge recorded at paragraph 47 of his decision evidence from  Mr  M
    that if the Appellant had to return to Albania that he  would  go  with
    her and that he had been to Tirana in September  2018  for  three  days
    because his own mother had passed away. In coming to  his  conclusions,
    the Judge took account of Mr M's history of mental  illness  and  noted
    that there was no medical evidence before him as to the nature  of  the
    issues or whether he is likely to be affected, if he went to live  with
    the Appellant in Albania. In the circumstances the Judge  took  Mr  M's
    evidence "at face value" and was satisfied that he  would  support  the
    Appellant and go to Albania with her.

 8. The Judge concluded at paragraph 53 of his decision that the  Appellant
    had previously managed to live alone in Albania and found a way to make
    some money. This may have made her vulnerable. However, she is now in a
    relationship with Mr M who indicated a preparedness to live with her in
    Tirana. His presence, the Judge concluded, if only for  a  short  time,
    would make the Appellant's circumstances very different. In  particular
    Albanian society would not consider the Appellant to be a single woman.

 9. The Judge placed importance on the Appellant having the support of  her
    partner and found that their relationship and his presence  in  Albania
    were determining factors. Accordingly,  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that she would be vulnerable to or at  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked. The Judge noted that she had managed  to  escape  from  her
    trafficker who, in the four years since the Appellant escaped from  him
    in England has not been in contact with the Appellant's parents in  her
    country of  origin.  The  Judge  found  the  risk  of  the  Appellant's
    trafficker and his cohorts seeking retribution against the Appellant to
    be highly speculative and that there was insufficient  evidence  within
    the appeal to suggest that they would take active measures to seek  out
    the Appellant.

10. Coupling all these factors together the Judge concluded that there  was
    not a reasonable degree of likelihood that the  Appellant  will  be  at
    risk of suffering serious harm if returned to Albania.

11. Ms Glass relied upon the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  Her
    submissions were very little more than an  argument  with  the  Judge's
    findings. She urged me to accept that the Judge had materially erred in
    concluding that the Appellant would be safe in Albania if returned. Her
    partner had mental health issues and the Judge has failed to appreciate
    the totality of her vulnerability. Beyond that there is  an  inadequate
    analysis of Article 8.

12. She argued that the Judge's findings at paragraph 53  of  his  decision
    were pivotal and that contrary to the finding that Mr M could return to
    Albania with her the Judge had failed  to  recognise  his  mental  ill-
    health and depression and suggested to me that he would  be  unable  to
    return with her.

13. Ms Cunha submitted that the Judge had  not  materially  erred.  He  had
    carefully considered the vulnerabilities of the Appellant and following
    his assessment he was entitled to come to the findings that he did. The
    Appellant's trafficker had not tried to  locate  either  the  Appellant
    herself or her parents. The Appellant would have the support  of  Mr  M
    including financial assistance from him. There  is  no  reason  why  he
    could not return to Albania with her, as found by the Judge.

14. I find that there is here no material  error  of  law  whatsoever.  The
    Judge has carefully considered the totality of the  evidence  and  made
    factual findings in relation  to  the  Appellant's  circumstances.  The
    factual matrix has then been set into the  context  of  the  background
    material including case  law,  expert  evidence  and  other  background
    material.   The   Judge   has   assessed   the   Appellant's    claimed
    vulnerabilities but has found, on the individual facts  of  this  case,
    that they are met by the support that the Appellant has not  only  from
    her current partner, but also her parents alongside a finding that  the
    Appellant's trafficker has not sought to contact her since her  fleeing
    from him and similarly has not sought to contact her parents. The Judge
    was entitled to come to the conclusions that he did. The arguments  put
    forward are no more than a disagreement with findings that were open to
    be made on the totality of the evidence. Ms Glass raised the  issue  of
    Article 8 but that was not a  matter  raised  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal or indeed in the subsequent grant.

15. There is here no arguable error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                                    Date: 3 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



