
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13829/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th March 2019                   |On 29th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                    W. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Robinson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Loke) promulgated on  29th  October  2018  whereby  she  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to refuse the
    Appellant's protection claim on the  grounds  of  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and Articles 2/3 of the ECHR.  The Appellant is  a  national
    of Algeria.  Her husband and two children are dependent on  her  claim.
    Both children were born in the UK after she arrived.  The core  of  the
    Appellant's claim is that she, her husband and children will be at real
    risk of serious harm  in  Algeria,  because  she  married  her  husband
    against her family's wishes after eloping with him.

 2. Her claim is that she cannot safely relocate to  a  different  part  of
    Algeria in that there is insufficiency of  protection  for  them.   Her
    father and brothers will seek her out and  kill  her  and  her  husband
    wherever she goes because she has brought dishonour upon  their  family
    because her father had arranged for her to marry her cousin. Her  claim
    is that she and  her  husband  had  already  tried  to  relocate  to  a
    different town, but she received information that her  whereabouts  was
    known. Therefore she and her husband left Algeria and travelled to  the
    UK.

 3. In support  of  her  claim  she  relied  upon  her  and  her  husband's
    testimony, a country expert report from Dr  Seddon  dated  8th  October
    2018 together with translated text messages from her  family  revealing
    threats made, medical evidence and  a  copy  family  book  showing  the
    marriage with her husband "Y".

 4. The Respondent disbelieved the Appellant's claim and said in any event,
    even if accepted, her claim was a fear of her family (non-state actors)
    and there was adequate state protection available from the  authorities
    in Algeria.  The Appellant appealed to the FtT.

The FtT Hearing

 5. Having set out the factual background, the FtTJ said at [14]:

         "The  main  issue  for  my   consideration   is   the   appellant's
         credibility.  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  given  a  broadly
         constant account in her interviews and in all  evidence  before  me
         have (sic) evidence was supported by the evidence of  her  husband.
         I assess them to be honest witnesses;  taking  into  account  their
         demeanour, the fact they gave direct answers to all  questions  put
         to them in cross-examination and that their accounts  were  broadly
         consistent with each other and with the asylum interviews."

 6. Having made that assessment however,  the  judge  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's claim that it was reasonably likely  that  the  Appellant's
    family had discovered her location in Beni Saf, the town to  which  she
    said she and her husband had fled in order to escape from her family.

 7. The judge's reasonings for not accepting that  the  Appellant's  family
    had discovered her location are set out in [27] and [28].

 8. Building on those findings the judge continued by saying that  even  if
    she was wrong about the Appellant's  whereabouts  being  known  by  her
    family, the Appellant could nevertheless safely relocate  elsewhere  in
    Algeria.  She dismissed the appeal.

 9. Permission to appeal the FtT's decision was granted by the  UT  on  the
    basis that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the
    reasonableness of relocation.  Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether the decision  of  the  FtT  contains  material  error
    requiring it to be set aside and re-made.

Onward Appeal/UT Hearing

10. I heard submissions from Ms Robinson for the Appellant,  and  Ms  Cunha
    for the Respondent.

11. Ms Robinson's submissions followed the grounds seeking permission.  She
    submitted that the FtTJ had failed to take  into  account  the  country
    expert's report in relation to both risk on return and  sufficiency  of
    protection.  Her failure to take into account  this  material  evidence
    rendered the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  ability  to  internally
    relocate  flawed.   In  support  of  this   assertion,   she   referred
    specifically to Dr Seddon's report as a whole and in  particular  those
    parts of it concerning the position of women in Algeria (paragraph 4.13
    onwards).  She said that  key  aspects  of  the  report  had  not  been
    considered by the judge.

12. In view of the credibility findings that the judge had made  concerning
    the treatment that the Appellant had  suffered  at  the  hands  of  her
    father, Ms Robinson maintained that  this  was  a  case  where  it  was
    necessary that the judge showed that she had  taken  into  account  the
    supporting evidence of the country expert. It was  his  evidence  which
    lent weight to the Appellant's claim that she could not safely relocate
    anywhere in Algeria.

13. The second strand to Ms Robinson's submissions  followed  on  from  the
    first. It centred on the  fact  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's ability to internally relocate was incomplete and therefore
    flawed. This related to the  test  of  reasonableness  of  return.  The
    Appellant is suffering from PTSD and had medical  evidence  to  support
    this diagnosis.  She claims that because of the treatment she  suffered
    at the hands of her family it would be unduly harsh on  her  to  expect
    her to relocate to a country where she has a subjective fear of  return
    on account of ill treatment. The FtTJ in dealing with  this  aspect  of
    the claim simply said that Algeria  had  a  health  service  which  has
    mental health facilities [34].  She made no proper analysis showing she
    had taken into account the question of whether or not  the  Appellant's
    diagnosis of PTSD was a relevant factor in determining whether  or  not
    the  Appellant's  subjective  fear  reached  the  threshold  of  "undue
    harshness" of internal relocation (FK (Kenya) [2008] EWCA Civ 119).

14. She submitted that these matters were sufficient to show that the judge
    had made material errors in her decision  making  and  accordingly  the
    Appellant had not been afforded the opportunity of having had her  case
    fully considered.  The decision should therefore be set aside  and  re-
    made.

15. Ms Cunha responded with the following submissions.  She referred to the
    CPIN and said that this document indicates that there is  an  effective
    police system in Algeria.  The judge had referred to  it  [32].   There
    was no reason  put  forward  why  the  police  would  not  protect  the
    Appellant and her family. The judge had found  that  any  risk  to  the
    Appellant was a limited one.  The Appellant's claim is that  she  fears
    non-state actors, i.e. her father and brothers. So far as it  was  said
    that the judge had not properly considered Dr Seddon's report, Ms Cunha
    pointed out that the judge had made reference to the report  [30].   In
    any event, the judge was not obliged  to  go  through  every  piece  of
    evidence placed before her.  Any error in not specifically referring to
    Dr Seddon's report was immaterial, because the judge had made  a  clear
    finding at [32] that she was placing reliance on the CPIN.

16. In so far as the medical evidence is concerned the judge's  finding  at
    [34] was adequate to  allow  her  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant had not reached the threshold of establishing  that  internal
    relocation was unduly harsh. Altogether the  judge's  reasons  for  the
    findings that she had made were adequate. The decision should stand.

17. At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    reasons.

Consideration

18. I am satisfied that the grounds are made out for the following reasons.
     Having assessed the Appellant as a credible and  honest  witness,  the
    FtTJ then conducted a risk assessment in relation to risk on return and
    sufficiency of protection.  The judge's findings on those  matters  can
    be distilled into  her  saying  at  [27]  that  she  did  not  find  it
    reasonably likely  that  the  Appellant's  family  had  discovered  her
    location in Beni Saf, and a finding at [35] where she says:

         "I find the appellant can be safely relocated in a  different  area
         in Algeria. I also find that there is sufficiency of protection  in
         Algeria.  Furthermore I am  satisfied  the  appellant  can  receive
         appropriate medical treatment for her issues in Algeria."

19. It has always been the Appellant's claim that her family would be  able
    to find her (and her husband),  because  of  their  extensive  contacts
    formed through their market trading business.  The judge concludes that
    she finds this claim "problematic" [31]. In other words  she  does  not
    accept this claim.  However in coming to this conclusion it is hard  to
    see that she has fully considered the entirety of the  evidence  placed
    before her by the Appellant to support this aspect  of  her  claim.   I
    acknowledge that, as Ms Cunha pointed out, the  judge  referred  to  Dr
    Seddons's report at [30], where she has specifically recorded  that  at
    paragraph 4.26 he states that it  is  plausible  that  the  Appellant's
    father would be able to find  them,  particularly  if  they  maintained
    contact with other family members and friends.  However that is as  far
    as it goes.  Having set out Dr Seddon's opinion on the plausibility  of
    this claim, the FtTJ makes no further  comment  on  his  evidence.   In
    saying that she finds the claim "problematic" it would appear that  she
    has rejected Dr Seddon's  opinion,  but  her  reasoning  for  so  doing
    remains unclear.

20. Likewise nowhere does the judge bring into consideration that  part  of
    Dr Seddon's report in which he gives his view that he agrees  with  the
    Appellant that the police in Algeria do not have  sufficient  resources
    to protect her and that they regard such disputes as "family  matters".
    The judge does refer to the opposing view contained in the CPIN and may
    well prefer that view.  The  difficulty  is  that  the  judge  is  only
    entitled to prefer one view over another  provided  it  is  clear  that
    consideration has been given to both views and reasons  given  for  the
    preference chosen.  I cannot see that this happened here.  A failure to
    properly consider,  and  make  findings  on,  relevant  evidence  is  a
    material error.

21. So far as reasonableness of return is concerned, it is the  Appellant's
    case that she falls within the  "undue  harshness"  test  in  that  her
    subjective fears of her family are such  that  they  have  reached  the
    threshold of undue harshness (FK (Kenya)).  I find that  the  FtTJ  has
    failed to fully grapple with this issue.  There  was  medical  evidence
    put forward which indicated that the Appellant suffers from  PTSD,  but
    all the FtTJ says about this is in effect there are medical  facilities
    available in Algeria.  This sidesteps the point in issue.  There  needs
    to be a proper examination made of the medical evidence in the  context
    of whether this evidence is sufficient to  show  that  the  Appellant's
    subjective fears, even if objectively unfounded, reach the threshold of
    undue harshness.  The FtTJ has failed to address this  issue  and  make
    proper findings. That is also a material error.

22. For the above reasons, I find there is a possibility that had the  FtTJ
    paid closer attention to the totality of the  evidence  before  her,  a
    different conclusion might have resulted.  I set aside the decision.  I
    make no comment on the merits or otherwise of the case as a whole. This
    will be a matter for another judge to decide.

23. I canvassed with the parties the appropriate venue for the disposal  of
    this appeal in the event I set aside the decision.  I was aware that it
    was not possible for me to re-make the decision because  correspondence
    with the UT showed that the hearing was set down and restricted  to  an
    "Error of Law "issue only.  Both parties were of the view that this  is
    a matter which will require extensive fact  finding  and  therefore  in
    fairness to  the  Appellant,  should  be  returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to re-make  the  decision.  In  addition  Ms
    Robinson indicated that there would be further evidence to consider, in
    the form of medical reports and an addendum to Dr Seddon's report.

24. I was asked by Ms Robinson to consider preserving the findings made  by
    the FtTJ that the Appellant  had  disobeyed  her  family  and  suffered
    violence at the hands of her father. I am wary of  preserving  findings
    when remitting to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  have  set  aside  the
    decision essentially because  of  a  deficiency  in  the  judge's  fact
    finding concerning the risk on  return.  The  judge  hearing  the  case
    afresh will therefore have to engage in a fact finding  exercise  which
    will require him to assess the credibility of whether there is  a  risk
    on return by reference to the Appellant's history. It seems to me  that
    it would be invidious to fetter the judge in  his  decision  making  by
    importing findings made by another judge.  This is one of  those  cases
    where the judge should be free to make his own assessment of the  claim
    by looking at all matters holistically.  This  case  requires  a  fresh
    hearing altogether and I  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  in  its
    entirety with no findings preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 29th October 2018  is
set aside for material error.  The appeal will be  remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing with no findings preserved.   The  hearing
should take place before a judge other than Judge Loke.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     26 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
