
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13949/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 12 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     MR
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, direct access counsel
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), we make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lal promulgated 21 March 2019, dismissing on all grounds
    his appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  30
    November 2018, to refuse his claim for international protection made on
    5 June 2018.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  on
    24 April 2019. Thus the matter came before us sitting as a panel of the
    Upper Tribunal on 3 June 2019, listed for an error of law hearing.

 3. At the outset of hearing, Mr Avery indicated  that  he  was  unable  to
    resist the appeal on  the  grounds  set  out  in  the  application  for
    permission, on the basis of which Judge Hollingworth granted permission
    to appeal. In summary it is clear that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal cannot stand and is flawed for error of  law  in  that,  in  a
    number of instances, findings were  unsupported  by  sufficient  cogent
    reasoning, such as in respect of the delay in claiming  asylum  and  in
    rejecting the claim of political activism. Further, at [23]  the  judge
    dismissed the documents relied on in support of the protection claim as
    unreliable but did so in a single sentence providing no  reasoning  and
    appears to have fallen into the Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ  367  error  of
    failing to reach credibility findings with  sufficient  regard  to  the
    evidence considered as a whole.

 4. In the circumstances, it was not necessary to hear from Mr Syed-Ali.

 5. Pursuant to Rule 40(3) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008, the Upper Tribunal may give a decision orally at a hearing and is
    not required to provide written reasons  for  the  decision  where  the
    decision is made with the consent of the parties, or the  parties  have
    consented to the Upper Tribunal not giving  written  reasons.  Both  Mr
    Avery and Mr Syed-Ali agreed and were content  for  us  to  proceed  in
    disposing of the appeal without reasons.

 6. We agreed with the submission of both representatives that, having  set
    it aside, the decision should be remitted to be remade  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 requires either that the case is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with directions, or it must be remade by the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement  Act  2007  does  not
    assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. This
    is a case which falls squarely within the Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement at paragraph 7.2. The effect of the error has been to deprive
    the appellant of a fair hearing and that the nature or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal
    to be re-made is such that it is appropriate to remit  this  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.

Notice of Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     We set set aside the decision.

                    We remit the appeal to be decided afresh in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal.

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Consequential Directions

   1) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
      Cross;

   2) The appeal may be listed before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  with
      the exception of Judges Lal and Hollingworth;
     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
