
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13702/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th March 2019                             |On 18 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  Udom [S]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E. M. M. Smith, promulgated on 6th  February  2018,  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham Priory  Court  on  29th  January  2018.   In  the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  1st
    January 1950.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    8th  December  2017,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.   He  has
    remained in the UK with his wife, and his daughter, who was born on 1st
    February 1979, and his son, who is in his mid-20s.  It is a feature  of
    this appeal that the Appellant's daughter is deaf  and  has  difficulty
    speaking and that those  difficulties  have  been  in  existence  since
    birth.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is a  Sikh.   In  early
    2014, he was visited in his shop by four men who were from the Taliban.
     They told him to convert to Islam.  They asked him to pay US$20,000 or
    leave the country.  The Appellant had no money.  He was struck  by  the
    men with a butt of a knife.  The next day they made the  same  demands.
    At some stage the Appellant handed over US$10,000 and another  US$5,000
    later on.  The Appellant sought advice  from  the  local  Sikh  temple.
    Some two and a half months later  the  Taliban  returned  and  demanded
    another US$20,000.  A week later the Taliban came  to  the  Appellant's
    home and beat him up.  His son was beaten up.  They tried to  take  and
    drag his daughter away.  The Appellant and his wife held onto her.  The
    Taliban desisted and left.  The Appellant states he was wanted  by  the
    police.  He went into hiding.  He did so with his  family.   He  stayed
    with a Muslim friend by the name of [HS].   He  stayed  in  hiding  for
    eighteen months.  In the meantime Mr [S] ran the Appellant's two shops.
     When Mr [S] was also found out as helping the Appellant's  family,  he
    was also beaten up.  In the end  the  Appellant  and  his  family  were
    forced to leave Afghanistan with the help of the local Sikh temple.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not find the Appellant to be  a  credible  witness.   She
    held that the Appellant had concocted his  account  of  the  events  in
    Afghanistan.  The Appellant had prevaricated and avoided answering even
    the most straightforward questions.   The  Appellant's  answer  in  the
    screening interview (at question 4.1) did not refer to threats from the
    Taliban (see paragraph 26 of the determination).  It was  not  accepted
    that the Appellant would have been in hiding for one and a  half  years
    and that he was attacked by the Taliban (paragraph 29).  On  the  basis
    of the country guidance case of TG and Others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted)
    Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595, the judge proceeded  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal (at paragraph 28).

The Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account all the risk factors set out in the country guidance case of TG
    and Others,  bearing  in  mind  the  general  unlikelihood  of  Muslims
    employing any member of the Sikh community, difficulties Sikhs face  in
    retaining their property, and the decrease of support  from  the  local
    Sikh temple in that country.  Second, that the  judge  failed  to  give
    proper consideration to the vulnerability of the Appellant's  wife  and
    disabled daughter.

 6. On 5th March 2018 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 4th March  2019,  Mr  Samra,  appearing  on
    behalf of the  Appellant,  relied  upon  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   He
    submitted that the judge had erred in the  following  two  respects  in
    particular.  First, there was actually no difficulty in the reply  that
    the Appellant gave during his screening interview  (at  question  4.1),
    which is set out in full by  the  judge  at  paragraph  26.   When  the
    Appellant  is  asked  to  briefly  explain  why  he  cannot  return  to
    Afghanistan, the Appellant states,

         "Our life was in danger and my pride was in danger as well.   Also,
         due to fighting in Afghanistan......  Because of the  revolution  I
         was in danger.  You are accepted [in]Afghanistan by  law,  but  you
         are not accepted by the people who  reject  us.   We  shouldn't  be
         amongst Muslims".

 8. The judge had criticised this answer on the basis that the Appellant at
    no stage referred to threats from the Taliban  or  to  the  demands  of
    money that they complained about later.  Mr Samra submitted,  that  the
    questionnaire, in the screening interview, did not even  get  round  to
    asking, "who" it was that the Appellant claimed to have  been  attacked
    by.




 9. Had that question been asked at section 4 of the  screening  interview,
    and had the Appellant then not referred to the  Taliban  in  terms,  he
    could be criticised for not having referred to the Taliban as being his
    tormentors.  Yet, the judge in proceeding to apply the country guidance
    case of TG and Others goes on to say that,

         "I'm satisfied that this  Appellant  accepted  his  answer  in  the
         screening interview (4.1) that his  complaint  was  not  about  the
         Taliban............  Indeed, he accepted that he is accepted by law
         and were rejected by some of the people.  The  Appellant  expresses
         the view that Sikhs should not  live  amongst  Muslims"  (paragraph
         28).

10. Second, even insofar as it is the case that the  judge  refers  to  the
    country guidance case of TG and Others, what the judge does not then do
    is refer to the risk factors that would eventuate  in  the  Appellant's
    case.  The Appellant is a 58 year old man.  He has a disabled daughter.
     And it is not conceivable that he would be  able  to  return  back  to
    Afghanistan and gain employment.  The judge should have considered this
    in the context of TG and Others.  The failure to give express regard to
    the risk factors, set out in the country guidance case, was an error of
    law.

11. For her part,  Mrs  Aboni  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   She
    submitted that the judge in terms set out the country guidance case  of
    TG and Others (at paragraph 28).  Therefore it could not be  said  that
    the approach could be faulted.  The judge also had regard to more  than
    the discrepancy between the screening  interview  and  the  Appellant's
    later evidence.  There were questions  about  whether  the  Appellant's
    relatives were in the  United  Kingdom.   There  were  questions  about
    whether they would be picked  out  as  a  target  in  the  Sikh  temple
    (gurdwara),  and  the  Appellant  failed  to  answer   these   clearly.
    Furthermore, the Appellant's case was that he and his family lived with
    a Muslim family friend, and the friend's son and  the  Appellant's  son
    continued to conduct the Appellant's business for eighteen months.   At
    this stage, Mr Samra,  interrupted  to  say  that  this  was  factually
    incorrect.  The suggestion (which appears in  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement) is that it was Mr [S]'s son who had joined up with Mr [S] to
    look after the business.  It was not the Appellant's  son.   That  made
    all the difference, submitted Mr Samra.

12. In reply, Mr Samra went on to say that the quote of  the  Secretary  of
    State was contrary to his own policy (see page  100)  which  states  at
    paragraph 3.1.4 that  "careful  consideration  must  be  given  to  the
    Appellant's circumstances ...".

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that it falls to be set aside.  My reasons are  as  follows.
    First, although the judge does refer to the country guidance case of TG
    and Others (at paragraph 28), she does not undertake an analysis of the
    risk factors that would apply to the  Appellant,  at  the  age  of  58,
    together with a disabled daughter, and a wife, who would have to return
    back to Afghanistan.

14. In particular, the position of women in Afghanistan in  this  situation
    is one that TG expressly referred to.  In that case there was  evidence
    from Dr Giustozzi (at paragraph 15) that,

         "The Sikhs are easy targets for abuse given their minority  status.
         .......... discrimination against Sikhs continue  to  be  reported.
         Harassment from other Sikhs and Hindus occurs, particularly at  the
         Bazaar, and Sikh children commonly are caught up in fights  between
         themselves and Muslims.  Attempts  are  made  to  forcibly  convert
         Sikhs from their religion to become Muslims".

15. Second, Dr Giustozzi, had expressly referred to

         "Potential problems the Appellant could have if he was returned  to
         Afghanistan without the capital required and  restart  a  business.
         He would find it  difficult  to  earn  his  livelihood.   He  would
         continue to face discrimination and abuse, and all his  dependants.
         Costs of living are comparatively high and housing is difficult  to
         secure ..." (at paragraph 15).

    These matters, accordingly, needed to be carefully  considered  in  the
    determination.

16. Third, the position of the Appellant's wife and disabled daughter,  and
    their  particular  vulnerability  in  this  context,   needed   careful
    evaluation.  In the circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  judge  did
    not apply the country guidance  case  in  spirit  to  this  Appellant's
    family situation.  Whilst I understand why that  would  have  been  the
    case, in circumstances where the Appellant  presented  himself  as  "an
    unhelpful witness" (paragraph 29), who failed to answer straightforward
    questions, it is nevertheless the case,  that  the  scriptures  of  the
    country guidance case of TG and Others  ought  to  have  been  properly
    applied.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision falls to be set aside.   I  set  aside
    the decision of the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.
    This appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge  E.  M.  M.  Smith  pursuant  to
    practice statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Direction.

18. No anonymity direction is made.

19. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2019

