
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/13493/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th May 2019                        | On 22nd May 2019                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     s L
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant who was born on 11th May 1979 is a male citizen of Ghana.
     His application for protection was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    on 4th October 2018.  His appeal against that refusal was dismissed  by
    Judge Greasley following a hearing on 3rd January 2019.  In essence the
    Judge did not accept that the Appellant had established  his  sexuality
    or that in the alternative if he had, that he would need to  alter  his
    behaviour as he was a private individual who did not seek to flaunt his
    sexuality.

 2. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle granted permission to appeal on  26th
    March 2019 stating that  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge's  findings
    between [49-51] are inadequately reasoned and that it is arguable  that
    the Judge unnecessarily embarked on a search for corroboration.

 3. The findings made by the Judge are contained within [49-51]  but  refer
    back to [45-48].  I set those paragraphs out here:

         "45. I do not find this explanation to be credible.   Although  the
             appellant was a child at the time, he was nonetheless 15 years
             of age and has accepted elsewhere  in  evidence  that  he  was
             aware that sexual relationships between same-sex couples,  but
             particularly males,  was  frowned  upon  and  the  subject  of
             widespread societal discrimination.   Moreover,  although  the
             appellant asks me to accept he has provided a credible  reason
             as to why at the time he did not ensure that the room door was
             locked, there is no explanation or credible  account  provided
             as to why Mr O, as a 45-year-old male, was not have considered
             this issue.  The appellant merely claims that this was a spurt
             of the moment event but given that the sexual  encounter  took
             place in a compound where several family members resided, I do
             not find it credible that this event occurred  in  the  manner
             claimed.

         46.  Despite the appellant claiming that he has had other  same-sex
             relationships, no one has provided any supporting  documentary
             statements or correspondent to the  tribunal  in  relation  to
             such claimed relationships.  The appellant claims that  he  is
             not in a gay relationship at present.  There is no  supporting
             evidence that he has had any gay relationship  in  the  United
             Kingdom, or indeed that he has attended any gay bars or  other
             similar establishments.  There is no supporting  evidence  the
             appellant has  participated  in  any  activity  with  the  gay
             community in the United Kingdom.  Indeed, on 26 September 2011
             he was formerly served with overstayer documentation  being  a
             person liable to removal, his  previous  visa  in  the  United
             Kingdom having expired.  It was only when the appellant  faced
             removal that he eventually decided to claim asylum  six  years
             later in December 2017.  I  find  these  are  simply  not  the
             actions  of  a  genuine  refugee  in  need  of   international
             protection.  I find that  the  appellant's  failure  to  avail
             himself of a reasonable opportunity to seek protection further
             damages his credibility by virtue of the operation of  Section
             8 (5) of the Immigration and Asylum (Treatment  of  Claimants,
             etc), Act 2004.

         47.  I have considered the important decision of HJ  (Iran)  (2010)
             where the Supreme Court considered  the  correct  approach  to
             assessing  asylum  claims  from  applicant's  claiming  to  be
             homosexual.  As a first stage analysis, I do not  accept  that
             the appellant is in fact gay, or that he would be  treated  as
             gay by potential persecutors in his  country  of  nationality,
             namely Ghana.  I  am  satisfied  on  the  available  objective
             evidence that gay people who lived openly would be  liable  to
             persecution in the appellants country of  nationality,  and  I
             must therefore go on to consider what the appellant  would  do
             if he were to be returned to Ghana.  HJ (Iran) notes  that  if
             an individual would in fact live openly and be  exposed  to  a
             real risk of persecution, then he would have well founded fear
             of persecution.  If, on the other  hand,  the  tribunal  found
             that the applicant would in fact live discreetly and so  avoid
             persecution the tribunal must then go and ask  itself  why  he
             would do so.  HJ (Iran) provides that if an  individual  would
             choose to life discreetly because  that  was  how  he  himself
             would wish to live, or because of social  pressures,  then  an
             application for internal protection should be  rejected.   The
             decision notes that social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not
             amount to persecution and accordingly the convention does  not
             provide protection.

         48.  The appellant gave clear oral evidence that he was very much a
             private person who did not seek to flaunt his sexuality.

         49.  As a primary finding fact, I do not accept that the  appellant
             is in fact a gay person, for the reasons set out  within  this
             determination.  However, even  if  the  appellant  was  a  gay
             person, given his claim that he is a private person  who  does
             not flaunt his sexuality, such a person has  no  well  founded
             fear of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing  to
             do with any fear of persecution, he himself chooses  to  adopt
             way of life which means that he is not in fact  liable  to  be
             persecuted due to his gay orientation.

         50.  I therefore find the appellant is someone who wold be able  to
             return to his home area in Ghana.   I  reject  the  appellants
             claim to have been involved in a sexual relationship with Mr O
             and which incurred the wrath of his immediate family  members.
             He has an adverse immigration history and only  sought  asylum
             when facing asylum.  Nor is it credible  that  he  would  have
             returned to Ghana to see his mother, if, as he now  claims  he
             fled Ghana fearing a risk of ill treatment or persecution.

         51.  The appellant is therefore someone who  could  return  to  his
             home area without  risk  of  persecution  for  any  recognised
             convention reason.  The appellant is a relatively healthy male
             who has demonstrated considerable resourcefulness by  residing
             in the United Kingdom for a number of  years  even  after  his
             leave expired.  He only sought international  protection  when
             facing removal."

 4. Mr Bramble submitted that the Judge made evidenced based  findings.  He
    was not in error  in  relation  to  the  concern  as  to  the  lack  of
    supporting evidence of having a gay relationship in the United Kingdom.
     He was not seeking evidence from a home country where  he  could  face
    persecution. The Judge's was concern about lack of evidence from within
    the United Kingdom which is a protective host country.   There  was  no
    material error in relation to his treatment of HJ (Iran) [2010].

 5. The Appellant relied on his written grounds  which  I  have  considered
    carefully.   He  was  concerned  that  there  was  no  recognition   or
    acknowledgement of other accounts regarding other men with whom he  had
    had relationships with.  He said that he explained at the hearing  that
    he was a private person because of the horrible experiences he suffered
    whilst in Ghana.  He stated that the Judge  was  "unsettled"  with  the
    claim of K's age in the hearing.  He had however made  it  quite  clear
    that he stated what K told  him  about  his  age.   He  criticised  the
    Judge's challenge to the credibility of him opening up to his sexuality
    to a complete  stranger.   However  the  Appellant  said  that  at  the
    substantive hearing he made it clear that it was after some time before
    he opened up about his sexuality to K.  He explained about  the  reason
    for the delay in his claim within the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal that he was confused and only subsequently read an article  that
    gay people could gain asylum in the United Kingdom.  He also identified
    concerns in relation to medical services due to his high blood pressure
    and his desire not to flaunt his sexuality.

Discussion

 6. I am not satisfied that the  Judge  made  any  material  error  in  his
    assessment of the Appellant's sexuality.  The Judge set out  in  detail
    why he did not accept the Appellant had established he was  homosexual.
    It was for the Appellant to establish his claim to the  lower  standard
    and the Judge gave adequate reasons for his findings.  He was  entitled
    to note the lack of evidence from within the United Kingdom to  support
    his claim and was also entitled to  find  that  the  delay  in  seeking
    protection further  damaged  his  credibility.   Ground  1  amounts  to
    nothing more than a disagreement with the evidence-based findings.

 7. As ground 1 failed, the assessment of HJ (Iran) was irrelevant  as  the
    Appellant was not required to change his behaviour.  In any event,  the
    Judge was entitled to find that the Appellant's was very much a private
    person who does not seek to flaunt his sexuality. He was not  therefore
    required to change his behaviour even if he was gay.

 8. There is no material error of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is not set aside.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
22 May 2019

TO THE RESPONDENT - FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
22 May 2019
