
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13710/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House UT              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th May 2019                     |On 03rd June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                    m H H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Senior Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made. As a protection claim, it is appropriate to
do so.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born 22nd  January  1984.   She
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 21st November  2018
    to refuse her asylum claim made on the grounds of her  sexuality.   Her
    appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Greasley) which in a
    decision promulgated on 18th January 2019 dismissed the appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application to the  Upper
    Tribunal, in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the Judge's credibility findings between  [45]
         and [50] are inadequately reasoned.  It is arguable that the  Judge
         looks for corroboration unnecessarily at  [50].   The  grounds  are
         arguable."

    Therefore the matter comes before me in the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant pursues this appeal on three grounds:

     . The first ground  is  a  claim  that  the  judge  has  rejected  the
       Appellant's documentary  evidence  as  carrying  little  weight  and
       failed  to  give  sufficient  reasons  for  that   rejection.    The
       documentary evidence in question includes photographs, an e-mail and
       a letter submitted from  female  friends  with  whom  the  Appellant
       claimed to have had relationships.  It is said that failure to  have
       proper regard to this evidence resulted in unfairness  because  this
       was evidence which supported the Appellant's claim.

     . Grounds 2 and 3 take issue with specific findings made by the judge.
       Firstly it is argued that a finding at [49]  (that  the  Appellant's
       family would not have let her go to Dubai as she was a lesbian)  was
       an irrational one.  Secondly at [46] the  FtTJ's  finding  that  the
       Appellant's credibility was damaged in that she had  two  long  term
       relationships with women who were not  in  themselves  lesbian,  was
       also irrational in that no credit had been given for the  fact  that
       this information had been volunteered by the Appellant herself.

Error of Law Hearing

 4. Before me Mr Clarke appeared on behalf of the Appellant and Ms Pal  for
    the Respondent.  At the outset of the hearing Mr  Clarke  handed  up  a
    bundle of documents headed "Index to  supplementary  bundle"  and  date
    stamped received 7th May 2019.  The documents included the  Appellant's
    supplementary witness statement, which Mr Clarke said formed the  basis
    of the Appellant's submissions before me,  and  which  I  admitted.  In
    addition further documentary evidence was attached including a  witness
    statement from Ms M.R., GP records, copy photographs  and  a  "Deed  of
    Disinheritance" dated 28th September 2016.  I ascertained that none  of
    these documents were before  the  FtT  nor  had  they  been  served  in
    accordance with Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  Mr Clarke was unable to assist on why this was so.  I will
    reference this additional evidence further in this decision.

 5. Mr Clarke's submissions kept  to  the  lines  of  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.  The main thrust of his submissions was  that  the  judge's
    approach to the evidence was erroneous.  At [50] the judge  had  looked
    for corroboration of the Appellant's claim.  This was erroneous for two
    reasons.  Firstly the judge had given  insufficient  attention  to  the
    documentary evidence, namely the email and letter from the  Appellant's
    friends which had been produced in support of  the  Appellant's  claim.
    It was insufficient to simply say that he  gave  the  documents  little
    weight because they  were  from  friends.   If  the  judge  found  this
    evidence to be unreliable he needs to set out why it is so.  This needs
    to be referenced against the Appellant's own account that she was in  a
    relationship with various women whilst in Dubai.

 6. The second reason why the judge fell into error,  revolved  around  the
    photographs which the Appellant produced in support  of  her  claim  of
    lesbian  relationships  in  Dubai.   The  judge  indicated   that   the
    photographs did not show the Appellant to be  in  a  "specific  lesbian
    relationship".  This is not the correct test.  It  indicates  that  the
    judge closed his mind  to  the  central  question  which  needs  to  be
    considered as the first stage, namely is the Appellant  a  gay  person?
    The FtTJ had failed to have regard to relevant evidence relating to her
    sexuality  and  had  used  his  credibility   finding   regarding   the
    Appellant's early experiences as determinative rather than  looking  at
    matters holistically.  There was a possibility therefore that  had  the
    evidence concerning the Appellant's lifestyle in  Dubai  been  properly
    evaluated and balanced against the other adverse factors,  the  outcome
    of the appeal may well have been different.

 7. Ms Pal  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  defended  the  decision.   She
    submitted that the judge's credibility findings were  ones  which  were
    fully open to him to make.  The judge had set out his findings in  [46]
    to [50] and those findings were adequate to enable the judge  to  reach
    the conclusions he did.  A judge was not obliged to set out every piece
    of evidence before him.   The  grounds  amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's decision.

Consideration of Error of Law

 8. Having heard from the parties  and  carefully  considered  the  judge's
    decision, I am satisfied that the grounds are made out.  The assessment
    of credibility in an appeal such as  this  is  always  a  highly  fact-
    sensitive task.  This  is  particularly  so  in  an  appeal  where  the
    Respondent's case is that the Appellant is not a credible  witness  and
    had provided an unsupported account of her sexuality.  The judge's task
    is to consider  the  evidence  carefully  and,  where  the  Appellant's
    account was rejected, set out his reasons for rejecting  the  evidence.
    At the least it is necessary for the judge to give a brief  explanation
    of the conclusions that he has reached on the  central  issues;  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

 9. In cases such as the instant one it  is  necessary  as  a  first  stage
    analysis to make a finding on  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  is  in
    reality a gay person; HJ (Iran).  In coming to that  conclusion  it  is
    necessary for the judge to identify and resolve key  conflicts  in  the
    evidence and explain in clear and brief terms his reasons so  that  the
    parties can understand why they have won or lost.

10. Whilst I  accept  that  the  judge  has  made  sustainable  credibility
    findings on the Appellant's evidence concerning her early relationships
    in Pakistan, the difficulty in this case is that I do not see that  the
    judge has applied the same anxious scrutiny to the Appellant's evidence
    concerning her claimed relationships in Dubai. It has always been a key
    part of the Appellant's case  that  once  she  arrived  in  Dubai,  she
    adopted a lifestyle of forming lesbian  relationships.   Whilst  it  is
    correct to say that the Respondent did not accept  the  credibility  of
    the Appellant's claim because of  inconsistencies  in  her  answers  in
    interview, I cannot see that the judge has dealt sufficiently with  the
    evidence put before him in support of the Appellant's claim.

11. This  brings  me  to  the  documentary  evidence  which  the  Appellant
    provided.  The judge finds that this  evidence  is  of  little  weight.
    Whilst he is correct in saying that the photographs in  photocopy  form
    depict the Appellant with a number of young women in  social  settings,
    he goes on to qualify it by saying they do not serve to demonstrate the
    Appellant is in a specific lesbian relationship.  He then discounts the
    e-mail and letter as not being objective and independent.  I find there
    is no proper analysis of why he rejects this evidence.  It appears that
    the judge has formed a view that the  Appellant's  evidence  concerning
    her relationship with her two cousins (1998 to 2001) was not  credible.
    He has imported those credibility findings into saying that  the  whole
    of the Appellant's account is incredible.

12. That is the wrong approach.  I am reinforced in this view in  that  the
    key event that prompted the Appellant to leave Pakistan and  travel  to
    Dubai stemmed from an incident which she claims  took  place  in  2016.
    This involved being caught kissing her neighbour Lubna and receiving  a
    beating as a result.  This has  always  been  a  central  part  of  the
    Appellant's case and I cannot see that the judge has  dealt  with  this
    evidence and made a finding on the credibility  or  otherwise  of  this
    part of the claim.

13. It follows therefore that I find that the judge failed to make adequate
    findings of fact on  those  aspects  that  lay  at  the  heart  of  the
    Appellant's case.  It follows therefore that the decision of  the  FtTJ
    is infected by a material error of law.  The decision is set aside  and
    will have to be remade.

14. I then considered whether to remit the case to the FtT or to remake the
    decision myself.  In my judgment, the appropriate course  is  to  remit
    the matter to the FtT for hearing afresh with  no  findings  preserved.
    In reaching my decision I have taken into account that  in  determining
    the appeal, the nature and extent of  judicial  fact-finding  necessary
    will be extensive  and  the  fact  that  there  is  presumably  further
    evidence to adduce.

15. I refer to the additional documentary evidence which Mr  Clarke  sought
    to adduce before me, namely the statement of Ms M.R., GP records,  copy
    photographs and the "Deed of Disinheritance".  None  of  this  evidence
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.  No reason was given to me why this
    evidence had not been made available to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   If
    the Appellant wishes to adduce this evidence at the next hearing,  then
    an appropriate application should be made to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It should be accompanied by an explanation of  why  this  evidence  has
    only been submitted now. This is with particular reference to the  Deed
    of Disinheritance which is dated as far back as September 2016.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 18th January 2019  is
set aside for material error.  The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Greasley) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     29 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

