
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13884/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2017                   |On 21 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                    [M S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert of Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on [ ] 1973.  He  is  a
    Pashtu speaker from Paghman, near Kabul.  In 2001 he married and  there
    is a child of the marriage born in 2002.

 2. On 16 October 2002 the Appellant claimed asylum on arrival.  He  feared
    persecution on return because his father had been a major in the Afghan
    Army and worked in the Ministry of  Defence  during  the  time  of  the
    Najibullah regime.  And his eldest brother had worked in  the  Ministry
    for National Security.  He himself had worked as a  police  officer  in
    the security services.  On collapse of the Najibullah regime his family
    was perceived as responsible for the imprisonment of the brother  of  a
    local Mujahideen commander, Sher Alam and the execution of a nephew  of
    Sher  Alam.   Another  local  commander  subordinate  to   Sher   Alam,
    Hamidullah had been responsible for the confiscation  of  his  family's
    land and had killed an uncle of the Appellant.

 3. On 28 May 2003 the Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  and
    his appeal was dismissed by a determination promulgated on 16  December
    2003.  He did not exercise any rights of appeal. He attributes this  to
    the difficulties he experienced  in  finding  solicitors  to  instruct.
    Subsequently he consented to participation in  the  Assisted  Voluntary
    Removal Scheme but later he withdrew his consent and eventually  on  23
    October 2007 he was removed to Afghanistan.

 4. The Appellant  states  that  on  return  to  Afghanistan  his  sister's
    husband's family arranged for  him  to  travel  to  Pakistan.   He  was
    arrested at the border and taken to Kandahar where he was in prison and
    tortured for some six and a half months.  He states the reason for  his
    imprisonment was because of his association with his father and brother
    and  the  Najibullah  regime  which  had  been  responsible   for   the
    imprisonment of Sher Alam's brother and the execution  of  his  nephew.
    He had been able to escape when the prison was stormed by the  Taliban.
    He returned to the United Kingdom arriving on 23  April  2009  when  he
    again claimed asylum.  The  Tribunal  file  contains  no  documents  to
    establish what precisely happened thereafter  to  the  Appellant's  new
    claim, although the procedural history is  briefly  summarised  in  the
    Respondent's reasons for refusal. The NAB of it is that at  some  point
    after a 2nd application for judicial review the Respondent made a fresh
    decision on  30  November  2016  refusing  the  Appellant's  claim  and
    granting a right of appeal.

 5. The Appellant's wife and  son  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  9
    September 2015 having made an  unsuccessful  protection  claim  in  the
    Netherlands. Ms Isherwood stated they had made claims  for  asylum  but
    because the  claims  had  not  been  made  at  the  same  time  as  the
    Appellant's claim the Respondent could not treat them as dependants  of
    the Appellant although in effect she understood that dependency on  the
    Appellant was the basis for their claims.

 6. On 15 December 2016 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds are formulaic or generic and  include  a  claim
    based on respect for the Appellant's private and family life  protected
    by Article 8 of the European Convention.

The Respondent's Decision

 7. The Respondent summarised what the Appellant claimed he had endured  in
    Afghanistan and identified some apparent and unexplained discrepancies.
     The documents which the Appellant had  submitted  in  support  of  his
    claim were given little weight on the basis  of  the  jurisprudence  in
    Tanveer Ahmed* [2002] UKIAT 00439. These included an arrest  letter  or
    warrant of 8 January  2006.   The  Respondent  referred  to  background
    information and the  country  guidance  given  in  AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163  (IAC).   She  concluded  that  having
    regard to the discrepancies in  the  Appellant's  account  he  was  not
    credible and would not be at risk on return to Paghman or Kabul or even
    Pakistan.  She also referred to the adverse credibility  findings  made
    in the Tribunal's determination promulgated on 16 December 2003.

 8. She considered the claim under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention.
    She noted that  the  Appellant's  wife  and  child  had  unsuccessfully
    claimed asylum in the Netherlands and their claims made in  the  United
    Kingdom had on 2 March 2016 been refused on third country grounds.  The
    Appellant did not meet all the relevant requirements of Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules and Section EX was not engaged. The Appellant did
    not meet any of the time critical requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)
    of the Immigration Rules.

 9. The Respondent also considered the circumstances of his  wife  and  his
    child including the child's best interests and concluded there were  no
    very  significant  obstacles  to  their  re-integration  on  return  to
    Afghanistan.

10. The Appellant had claimed that his  medical  issues  were  one  of  the
    reasons he could not return to Afghanistan.  The Respondent noted  that
    there was no recent medical evidence to  support  his  claim  and  that
    suitable medication would be available in Afghanistan.  There  were  no
    exceptional or compassionate circumstances  to  warrant  the  grant  of
    leave on the basis of his private and family life and  the  application
    on Article 8 grounds was also refused.

The Standard and Burden of Proof

11. The standard and burden of  proof  in  relation  to  claims  under  the
    Refugee Convention, for humanitarian protection under the Qualification
    Directive and under  the  European  Convention  are  for  all  material
    purposes one and the same; that is the Appellant must  show  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that if returned to  his  country  of
    origin he will be persecuted for a  Refugee  Convention  reason  or  if
    removed from the United Kingdom will be subjected  to  treatment  which
    for the purposes of humanitarian protection  as  defined  by  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules will amount to serious harm  or  will  be
    subjected to treatment which will violate his rights under the European
    Convention.  This is  known  as  the  lower  standard  of  proof.   The
    effective date for assessment of the evidence in support of each  claim
    is the date of the hearing.  In the case of a free-standing claim  that
    Article 8 of the European Convention is engaged based on  circumstances
    arising in the United Kingdom, the  standard  of  proof  is  the  civil
    standard; that is on the balance of probabilities.  The burden of proof
    remains on the Appellant.

Documentary Evidence

12. The Appellant's solicitors  supplied  for  the  error  of  law  hearing
    leading to my decision of 3 August 2017 a full  bundle  with  an  index
    (AB). At my request they have subsequently supplied  a  chronology.  In
    addition to  the  documents  already  referred  to  or  mentioned,  the
    Tribunal file includes copies of:-

    (a)  The screening interview of the Appellant on 16 October  2002,  and
         24 April 2009.

    (b)  Substantive interviews of the Appellant on 8 April 2003 and 15 May
         2015.

    (c)  Statements of the Appellant dated 7 April 2003, 24 September 2003,
         27 May 2009 and 9 January 2017.

    (d)  A statement by the Appellant's wife dated 9 January 2017.

      e) An expert report by Mr T Foxley of 7 April 2017.

      f) An expert medical report of  21  October  2003  prepared  by  Dr  J
         Taghipour.

      g) An expert psychiatric report of 24 November 2003 prepared by  Dr  N
         Campbell.

      h) A letter of 30 April 2002 requiring production of the Appellant  at
         Military Command Headquarters with translation.

      i) A letter of 12 December 2005 from Sher Alam to the Paghman District
         Chairman that the Appellant has committed numerous  crimes  against
         the Islamic movement with translation.

      j) A letter of 26 January 2006 from  the  Village  Chief  of  Khaldari
         village in Paghman with translation.

      k) Home Office Country Policy and Information Note of August  2017  on
         the security and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.

      l) A skeleton argument prepared by Mr Gilbert for the October hearing.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal and the Error of Law Finding

13. By a decision promulgated  on  4  May  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Oliver dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  On 31
    May 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ransley granted permission to
    appeal.  By a decision promulgated on 3 August 2017 I found that  there
    was a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and
    set it aside.  Having regard to the turgid history of the appeal  which
    includes two First-tier Tribunal decisions of 26 September 2014 and  16
    March 2015  both  remitting  the  matter  to  the  Respondent  and  the
    overriding objective, I directed that the appeal be heard afresh in the
    Upper Tribunal and with the agreement of the  parties  reserved  it  to
    myself.

The Hearing on 18 October

14. The Appellant together with his wife and  son  attended.  Although  the
    parties were ready to proceed shortly after 10am, the hearing could not
    commence until 2pm when an interpreter had arrived.

15. The Appellant gave oral testimony.  He confirmed  his  current  address
    and that th contents of his four statements were true and accurate.

16. The land dispute with  Hamidullah  had  lasted  as  long  as  he  could
    remember. The land was family land and the owners included an uncle.

17. The arrest warrant at AB pages 355-356 had been  sent  to  him  by  his
    brother-in- that at the time he was in the United Kingdom: see  hearing
    replies 15-17.

18. Mr Gilbert referred to the arrest warrant which had  been  supplied  to
    the Repondent and to the Respondent's reasons  for  refusal  but  which
    warrant the Respondent had not been able  to  produce.   The  Appellant
    said that this was similar but in shorter form to  the  warrant  at  AB
    pages 355-356 and that the shorter style  of  the  arrest  warrant  was
    introduced in 2007. He had received the warrant in 2008 and it had been
    issued in Paghman by the government: see hearing replies 18-22.

19. The Appellant was referred to his return to Afghanistan in 2007 and was
    asked abut the authorities' visit to his home in  search  of  him.   He
    said that he had left early in the morning on the  next  day.   He  was
    asked when the visit had taken place. He  stated  it  had  been  on  26
    November 2007 which was the day  he  had  left  Afghanistan.   He  then
    explained that when he had been in prison he had  found  out  that  the
    authorities had visited the following day: see hearing replies 24-26.

20. In cross-examination the  Appellant  sought  to  explain  the  apparent
    inconsistency  onthe  basis  that  there  was   an   issue   with   the
    interpretation: see  hearing  reply  32.   He  sought  to  explain  the
    discrepancy about his claim to have been in prison in 2006 when he  was
    in the United Kingdom: see hearing reply 33 when he  confirmed  he  had
    been imprisoned in 2007 and that he had difficulty  remembering  things
    as a consequence of the torture he had experienced.

21. The Appellant confirmed that the family land had been  appropriated  to
    the time when he was still in school in Kabul.

22. The Appellant had been present when his father had been killed at their
    home and had been taken away by Sher Alam who was present at the  time:
    see hearing replies 42-46.  He was held by Sher Alam for some  five  to
    six months and when he was being transferred to another  base  used  by
    Sher Alam he tried to escape from the open top 4 x 4 vehicle  in  which
    he was being transported under guard.  He was the  only  prisoner.   He
    had jumped out of the vehicle and had been injured in the hand and  leg
    when the guards threw a grenade: see hearing replies 48-53.  During his
    imprisonment  he  had  been  interrogated  about  his  elder   brother,
    Najibullah,  and  tortured.   Subsequent  to  his  escape  attempt  and
    injuries, he was taken to hospital: see hearing replies 54,  56-58,  59
    and 80-85.

23. The Appellant was questioned about seeing Sher Alam.  He said  that  he
    had seen him once in 2002 and I noted this confirmed his 2005 interview
    reply 17.  However, at reply 19 he had corrected himself,  saying  that
    he had seen him once in 1992.  This was  pointed  out  to  him  and  he
    confirmed that he had only seen him in 1992 and not in  2002.   It  was
    then put to him that he had said he had seen Sher Alam when his  father
    had been killed and during his imprisonment.  His explanation  for  the
    apparent inconsistencies was that were a few cells where he had been in
    prison and he had last seen Sher Alam in 1992 at the place where he had
    been in prison.  He did not address the apparent inconsistency  in  his
    claim that he had seen Sher Alam at the family home when his father was
    killed and he was taken away and at the place  where  he  had  been  in
    prison: see hearing replies 62-65.

24. The Appellant  was  asked  about  his  family  and  in  particular  his
    siblings.  He explained  he  had  one  sister  and  an  older  brother,
    Najibullah killed in 2002.  He mentioned  that  his  father  had  three
    wives and that there were half-siblings and step-siblings.   He  had  a
    half-sister who was deceased and two half-brothers,  one  of  whom  was
    called Yasim and was also known as Asif.  He said he had not previously
    mentioned the wives of his father who were not  his  mother  and  their
    children, his half or step-siblings.   He  was  referred  to  his  2002
    screening when he had identified four brothers and one sister.  He  was
    able to identify them but said he did not include his deceased  sister,
    Naama.  There was no explanation given for  the  inconsistencies  which
    were pointed out to him between his stated siblings at  his  2002  2009
    screenings: see AB page 10.

25. He was asked where his siblings lived and replied simply  that  he  had
    had no contact since 1992 in Afghanistan because they  were  his  half-
    siblings.  He said that he had been informed that some of them had left
    Afghanistan and were in foreign countries.  It was put to him  that  in
    his 2002 screening interview he had said that he had  two  brothers  in
    the United Kingdom.  He replied it was a rumour which he had heard  but
    he had not found them.  There was no evidence of efforts to trace  them
    or explanation for the absence of any such evidence. He gave a  similar
    reply in respect of another brother who in 2002  he  had  said  was  in
    Pakistan: see hearing replies 97-103.  The inconsistencies between  the
    two screenings were put to him again and he gave a similar answer  that
    he had only spoken about his full siblings and not his  half  or  step-
    siblings.  He sought to explain any inconsistency  by  saying  that  in
    2002 he may have been asked a different question from that asked at the
    2009 screening. He was asked about how many siblings he  had  in  total
    although he had previously mentioned  that  it  was  not  his  cultural
    custom to identify half or step-siblings when asked about siblings: see
    hearing replies 104-106.

The Hearing on 6 December

26. There was insufficient time to complete the hearing on 18  October  and
    the matter was adjourned until 6 December. The  Appellant's  solicitors
    had sought an adjournment of the 6 December hearing on the  basis  that
    Mr Gilbert of Counsel  would  not  be  available.  Consequent  upon  an
    administrative oversight, the adjournment application was  refused.  Mr
    Burrett of Counsel renewed adjournment application  which  in  all  the
    circumstances I considered it appropriate to grant. Both parties agreed
    that they would not at any future date seek to argue that the delay  in
    completing  the  oral  evidence  and  eventual  promulgation   of   the
    Tribunal's decision as a reason to challenge it.





The Hearing on 15 January

27. The  hearing  did  not  start  until  1:15pm  because  the  Solicitor's
    interpreter had not arrived. I explained to him the procedure he should
    adopt if he had any  query  with  the  interpretation  offered  by  the
    Tribunal's interpreter. In the event no such issue was raised.

28. Ms Isherwood for the Respondent continued her  cross-examination  about
    the Appellant's siblings. It was at this point the Appellant  disclosed
    his father had had three wives and that they had each lived in separate
    establishments. One of the three, not his mother,  had  children  by  a
    previous marriage whom he had only seen once. He stated that  his  full
    siblings comprised one brother now deceased and two sisters of whom one
    is deceased. Ms Isherwood noted that at various times the Appellant had
    given the whereabouts of various siblings. He now said that he was  not
    in contact with any of them and so did not know their  whereabouts  and
    could have been mistaken in his previous evidence: see hearing  replies
    107-116.

29. It was put to the Appellant that he had been imprisoned  by  Sher  Alam
    for a considerable period of time and on more than one occasion but  he
    had survived, notwithstanding the Appellant's  claims  that  Sher  Alam
    wanted him dead by way of revenge for the execution of his  nephew  and
    imprisonment of his brother for which he held  the  Appellant's  father
    responsible. The Appellant said  that  he  did  not  know  why  he  had
    survived and attributed his survival to a divinely ordained destiny  or
    to Sher Alam not having an opportunity: see  hearing  replies  119  and
    126. This was notwithstanding the prominence of Sher Alam mentioned  at
    hearing reply 130.

30. Ms Isherwood referred to his flight to Pakistan in 2009. The  Appellant
    explained that his brother-in-law had assisted him for a short distance
    that thereafter he had been on his own. He had  been  arrested  at  the
    border when he  had  failed  to  produce  any  identity  document.  The
    Appellant stated that on  being  asked  details  where  he  lived,  the
    District Office was contacted and Sher Alam informed of  his  presence:
    see para 10 of his statement of 16 September 2011 at AB p.171.

31. Ms Isherwood then turned to the Appellant's account of the raid on  his
    in-laws' home following his return on 24 October  2007  2  Afghanistan.
    The Appellant said that he had been away from the property with another
    brother in law when the authorities raided and they had left an  arrest
    warrant: see hearing replies 131-134 and paras 7-10 of his statement of
    27 May 2009. Para 9 is peculiarly worded even on the basis that  it  is
    an interpretation of what the Appellant said  because  he  states  that
    "Sher Alam still believed that I was wanted for the death of his nephew
    and detention of his brother." It has been throughout  the  Appellant's
    case that Sher Alam was obliged to seek revenge as a family member of a
    victim, his nephew. It was accepted that the Appellant had handed  this
    warrant to the Respondent on arrival in April 2009.

32. The Appellant's wife gave oral testimony. She  adopted  her  statement.
    She suffered from difficulty in sleeping, restlessness and pains in her
    back, neck and joints. She produced a letter from a  nurse  as  medical
    evidence. She was on three types of medication but could  not  remember
    the names of any of them. She had been to a specialist  but  could  not
    explain why there was no expert medical  evidence  or  details  of  the
    specialist given to her husband's solicitors. She accepted that much of
    what was in her statement was a repetition of what she had been told by
    her husband: see hearing replies 141-165.

33. Mr Gilbert did not seek to re-examine the  Appellant's  wife.  At  that
    point Ms Isherwood for the Respondent stated that she had learned  that
    the wife had brought an application for judicial review  on  the  third
    country return issue. She had claimed asylum in the Netherlands and had
    then come to the United Kingdom. There was  a  brief  discussion  about
    this information. The wife had a separate appeal and although it  might
    have been helpful to have had some information about the wife's claim I
    took the view that having reached the close of  the  Appellant's  case,
    there being no more oral testimony, and having regard to the overriding
    objective the hearing of the Appellant's appeal should proceed  to  its
    conclusion.

Submissions for the Respondent

34. Ms Isherwood urged that the appeal be  dismissed.  She  relied  on  the
    various letters given reasons to refuse the Appellant's claim which the
    Respondent had  issued  since  he  first  arrived  in  2002.  Both  the
    appellant  and  his  wife  had  claimed  to   experience   difficulties
    remembering things although there was no medical  evidence  to  support
    such claims. The wife's evidence is essentially and so far as  relevant
    to this appeal a mere repetition of what  she  had  been  told  by  her
    husband. Both the Appellant and his wife had given evidence in a manner
    which  was  vague  and  evasive.  The   Appellant's   evidence   became
    increasingly vague and incoherent as he strayed outside the  limits  of
    the core of his claim.

35. Ms Isherwood referred to the Appellant's claim to  have  been  a  self-
    employed grocery shopkeeper when screened in 2002 at AB pp.6 and 10 and
    to have been a member of  the  police.  She  highlighted  the  numerous
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's  evidence  about  his  siblings  and
    their whereabouts at various screening interviews and at  the  hearings
    on 18 October and 15 January.  At  one  point  he  had  referred  to  2
    brothers being in the United Kingdom. At para 11 of his statement of 16
    September 2014 he had claimed that Sher Alam had targeted all the  male
    members of his family. Set against the claim that he  had  brothers  in
    the United Kingdom he had ample opportunity to obtain  their  testimony
    to support his claim.

36. The Appellant's description of the position of himself and  his  family
    in Afghanistan was not as he claimed. She turned to the documents which
    the Appellant had produced and which  were  before  the  Tribunal.  The
    letter from Sher Alam of 12 December 2005  referred  to  not  only  the
    Appellant but also his family as guilty of numerous crimes against  the
    Islamic movement but there was neither claim nor evidence that anything
    had happened to any of them since the date of the letter.  The  Islamic
    Council of Kabul's letter of 8 January 2006  was  vague  and  contained
    nothing specific. The Village Chief's letter of 26 January 2006  stated
    that it was given according to information from the Appellant's father-
    in-law. Little weight should be given to these  letters  and  also  the
    news item in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed*  [2002]  UKIAT  00439.  The
    Appellant  had  been  evasive  throughout  in  his  evidence.  He   had
    previously been found not credible by  Adjudicator  Aujla  in  December
    2003 against whose decision no application  for  permission  to  appeal
    made. Consequently, his adverse credibility finding stood in accordance
    with Devaseelan *[2002] UKIAT 702.

37. Ms Isherwood turned to Mr Foxley's report. He had noted that the prison
    break from Kandahar in 2008 had been widely publicised. It  would  have
    been easy for the Appellant to have learned the details and woven  them
    into his account. He had been detained on a number of occasions on  his
    own admission at the direction of Sher Alam, including at places  owned
    or occupied by him. Yet, despite  the  Appellant's  protestations  that
    Sher Alam wanted to wreak revenge on him for the death  of  his  nephew
    and imprisonment of his brother, the Appellant had survived.  This  was
    simply not plausible. I find the Appellant's explanation at para 10  of
    his statement of 9 January 2017 at AB p.307 to be weak.

38. She next turned to Dr Taghipour's medical report. This set out at  some
    length the Appellant's account but added little  if  anything  to  that
    account. The Appellant's explanation of escaping from  a  moving  truck
    and injuries from a hand grenade thrown after him  lacked  plausibility
    and detail.

39. It was implausible that the Appellant happened never to be present when
    the authorities had raided way he had been living or  staying  but  was
    out shopping or in an orchard or similar. Given what the Appellant said
    about the strength of the culture of revenge in Afghanistan and how  he
    and his family had been targeted, it was simply not  plausible  but  he
    had been able to survive for so long.

40. Ms Isherwood proceeded to a more detailed examination  of  Mr  Foxley's
    report. She made the following comments with reference to  the  mention
    paragraph numbers:

           o Para 13 the expert had accepted that it was difficult to  give
             a confident assessment. Verification of  many  of  the  events
             described by the Appellant was problematical. I note he  added
             that  the  core  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  account   were
             plausible in generic terms.

           o Para 13(e) the expert  had  not  referred  to  any  supporting
             evidence for the Appellant's claim that he was in fact out  of
             favour with Sher Alam.

           o Para 14 it was to be noted the expert did not take issue  with
             the Respondent's Country of  Origin  Information  Report  (the
             COIR).

           o  Para  14(b)  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  had  family   in
             Afghanistan. There was no evidence of  the  medical  treatment
             each of them required.

           o Para 16(c) this needed to be considered in the  light  of  the
             guidance given in AK (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
             UKUT 00163 (IAC) and the COIR, especially section 2.3.4.ff.

           o Para 18 the risks identified needed to be consists seen in the
             context of what she described as a  lack  of  explanation  and
             that little weight should be given  to  the  evidence  of  the
             Appellant's wife.

           o Para 21 the most the  expert  had  found  here  was  that  the
             Appellant "might be at least briefly questioned  upon  arrival
             and that there might be paperwork pertaining to his  name  and
             place of origin, but I do not have a good sense of  the  level
             of detail, scope, scale or intent of this process."

           o Para 26 the expert had relied on long dated  evidence  on  the
             power and influence of warlords who now  had  less  influence.
             The information at at para 28 on Sher Alam dated from 2003.

           o Para 30 the expert had noted that the  Kandahar  prison  break
             had been well documented and widely reported.

           o Para 30 the sources relied on were long dated

           o Para 37 the expert had only "sensed" the Appellant will not be
             able to access state protection.

           o Para 38 the evidence about the availability of  mental  health
             facilities was long dated.

           o Para 45 the Appellant has family in Afghanistan.

41. The error of law finding had mentioned a failure to refer  to  SO  KhaD
    [200 ] UKIAT..... In this determination the Upper Tribunal had made the
    point at para 20 that each case depended on its  particular  facts.  In
    the case of the Appellant he would not be at risk on return.

42. Ms Isherwood then referred to skeleton argument for the Appellant.  The
    part of the Appellant's claim based on the theft of family land 1992 by
    Hamidullah. The issue of the claimed theft of family  land  had  little
    bearing on the appeal given the  passage  of  time  and  the  decisions
    previously made in the  appeal.  The  medical  evidence  for  both  the
    Appellant and his wife was limited. She had already commented at length
    on the expert report of Mr Foxley. The  situation  in  Afghanistan  had
    moved on considerably in the more than 10 years since the determination
    in SO (KhaD).

43. Addressing the claim based on the Appellant's private and family  life.
    He could return with his wife and son as a family unit. No reliance had
    been placed on the short period during which his son had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom. Their removal as a family unit would not interfere with
    their private and family life. Reduced weight should be attached to the
    various letters of support at AB pp. 163-168. They referred to  knowing
    the Appellant over a period of time which  included  the  time  he  had
    spent in Afghanistan after his initial removal there.  The  failure  to
    mention the not insubstantial break in the period  of  acquaintanceship
    was notable.





Submissions for the Appellant

44. Mr Gilbert referred first to the wife's evidence.  This  needed  to  be
    considered in the light of what the  nurse  had  said  in  her  undated
    letter of late 2016 to her doctor. Some aspects of the wife's  evidence
    could have been known only to her, for example the raid on her sister's
    home some 20 days before she with her son fled Afghanistan referred  to
    at para 17. This raid was crucial because her account was evidence that
    the authorities continued to search for  the  Appellant  following  his
    escape from prison.

45. Few examples of the Appellant's evasiveness in his  evidence  had  been
    identified. At para 12 of his determination Adjudicator Aujla had noted
    the Appellant's low rank in the police service which  he  had  left  in
    1992. Thereafter the Appellant had been shopkeeper.

46. Mr Gilbert acknowledged that the Appellant had  displayed  considerable
    confusion about his siblings. He submitted that earlier there may  have
    been a lack of clarity but there was no indication  the  Appellant  had
    sought to mislead. His evidence at the January hearing had been  clear.
    He was not close to the children of his father's other  wives  each  of
    whom had lived separately from the others.

47. The Appellant had throughout been consistent about the issues with Sher
    Alam. He referred to AB pp 42 and 172. His wife had not personally been
    subject to any abuse by the authorities or others in  Afghanistan.  She
    would not have been involved in matters subsequent to the  land  theft.
    Women in Afghanistan were largely disenfranchised and  she  would  have
    not been perceived by Sher Alam as a threat.

48. Mr Gilbert asked  me  to  take  a  holistic  approach  to  the  medical
    evidence. The Appellant had  given  a  plausible  explanation  for  his
    scarring at the October hearing and in his statements at AB pp  43  and
    46.

49. With regard to the Appellant's mental health, Mr Gilbert referred me to
    the expert psychiatric report of Dr Campbell and the Doctor's letter at
    AB p319.

50. The Appellant had received the newspaper item and  other  documents  at
    various times  between  2003  and  2016.  Not  unsurprisingly,  it  was
    difficult  for  him  to  remember  when  he  received  each  individual
    document. The letter confirming his involvement with the  police  force
    at AB pp 76-77 was consistent  with  the  rest  of  his  evidence.  The
    Respondent had mislaid documents about the Appellant's 2007 arrest  and
    the visit made to him by his brother-in-law while he was in  detention.
    There was clear evidence the Respondent had those documents recorded at
    the screening interview at AB p 128. The arrest warrant was an original
    referred to in the 2014 statement at AB p 172 and  173  and  the   2017
    statement at AB p307.

51. On return in late 2007 to Afghanistan the Appellant had stayed with his
    father-in-law in Paghman: see AB p 139. Mr Foxley' expert report at  AB
    p 329 made it clear that internal  relocation  was  not  likely  to  be
    available for the Appellant.

52. The Appellant had given detailed evidence at the October hearing  about
    his escape  from  a  moving  truck  and  being  stopped  by  a  grenade
    explosion. There  was  no  information  available  about  the  military
    training and expertise of the guards on the truck. The  Respondent  had
    claimed that Sher Alam had had ample  opportunity  to  dispose  of  the
    Appellant but had not done so. However, there  was  no  information  to
    assess the state of his mind at various times during the  periods  when
    he had detained the Appellant. Possibly, keeping the Appellant detained
    had been Sher Alam's chosen form of revenge and must  be  seen  against
    his belief that the Appellant's family had  been  responsible  for  the
    detention of Sher Alam's brother as well as the death of his nephew. It
    was useless to speculate as to Sher Alam's motives.

53. The Appellant's detention in Kandahar from late  2007  had  been  in  a
    different province from his home province and  by  the  Border  Police.
    There was no evidence about the extent  or  otherwise  of  Sher  Alam's
    influence in Kandahar. Mr Foxley had addressed the areas  of  influence
    of Sher Alam and of his patron, Abdoul Rassoul Sayyaf in his report  at
    AB pp  332-333.  Both  had  established  reputations  as  human  rights
    abusers.  In  his  2003  statement  the  Appellant  had  detailed   the
    connection with Sher Alam: see AB p 42. At AB p 326 Mr Foxley had noted
    that the violent pursuit of blood feuds was common and the  Appellant's
    account in this respect was plausible. Further, if  the  Appellant  was
    for any reason sought by Sher Alam  he  would  likely  be  at  risk  of
    detention and abuse.

54. The Appellant had given a detailed  account  of  his  escape  from  the
    prison in Kandahar, referring to the two explosions: see AB pp 140a and
    334.

55. Mr Gilbert referred to SO (KhaD) and AK  (Article  15(c)Afghanistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC). Sher Alam and Abdoul Rassoul  Sayyaf  remained
    in play as warlords. The Appellant would be at risk in Kabul, Maidan or
    Kandahar. There was enough  evidence  to  justify  departing  from  the
    conclusions of Adjudicator Aujla. The issues  were  the  risks  flowing
    from the land theft and Sher Alam's desire for revenge.  The  Appellant
    in short was a victim of the regime and at risk  as  a  member  of  his
    family which for Refugee Convention purposes constituted  a  Particular
    Social Group. On return to Afghanistan the Appellant  would  face  very
    significant obstacles to  his  re-integration.  There  were  no  family
    members to whom he could turn and integration would be  more  difficult
    because of the mental health issues he and his wife experience.

56. He turned to the background evidence. He relied on the UNHCR April 2016
    report on Eligibility Guidelines for Asylum Seekers at  p170ff  of  the
    Appellant's supplementary bundle. The Appellant and his family would be
    destitute on return to Afghanistan. The Appellant had not worked  since
    2009, had mental health issues and was at risk from Sher Alam.

57. The evidence is that his son is well integrated into  school:  see  the
    letter from his school at AB p318. The family is unit is vulnerable and
    it would be disproportionate to remove the Appellant  with  or  without
    his family. The appeal should be allowed.

Findings and consideration

58. I have carefully considered the written and  oral  testimonies  of  the
    Appellant and his wife together with the expert country report, the two
    expert medical reports and the other assorted documents comprising  the
    medical evidence as well  as  the  submission  made  for  each  of  the
    parties. I have looked  at  the  documents  from  Afghanistan  and  the
    background evidence in the Appellant's  supplementary  bundle  and  the
    Respondent's Country Policy and Information Note of August 2017. I have
    noted the skeleton argument submitted for the Appellant  and  the  case
    law cited to the Tribunal. I have taken account that the Respondent has
    been unable to produce the documents  said  to  show  the  authorities'
    interest in the Appellant which he handed over in 2002.

59. I accept the Appellant's explanation at hearing replies 113-114 for  at
    least some of his confused replies to  questions  about  his  siblings,
    namely that his father had three wives each of whom  he  maintained  in
    separate establishments and who had little  contact  with  each  other.
    However, this does not explain why he stated when screened in 2002 that
    two male siblings were in the United  Kingdom  and  at  2003  interview
    reply 91 that he had a half or step  brother  in  England  and  at  the
    January  hearing  initially  maintained  that  some  siblings  or  half
    siblings were not in Afghanistan: see hearing reply 109.  When  pressed
    the Appellant said  he  simply  did  not  know  whether  they  were  in
    Afghanistan: see hearing reply 116. What the Appellant did not  explain
    is why this last information that he did not know  where  his  siblings
    took so long to come to light.

60. I take account of his claim to have worked in the intelligence services
    (KhaD) for a period of time: see 2003 interview reply 41. This  may  in
    some small part explain his evasiveness but does not explain the  folly
    of not truthfully answering non--aggressive questions about his family.
    I note the Appellant said in 2002 he had been a shopkeeper for  some  9
    years  and  this  would  tie  in  with  his  claim  to  have  left  the
    Intelligence Service when President Najibullah fell.

61. The Appellant places the start of his problems at the unlawful  seizure
    of family owned land by Hamidullah. He  is  clear  in  his  April  2003
    statement that the land was seized by Hamidullah who  shot  and  killed
    the Appellant's uncle and who  then  alleged  to  Sher  Alam  that  the
    Appellant's father had been involved in the detention  of  Sher  Alam's
    brother and death of his nephew. At para  11  of  the  2003  statement,
    having immediately previously  referred  to  Hamidullah  the  Appellant
    states "they" raided his home and killed his father and took him  away.
    The account of his father's death in 1992 at his 2003 interview replies
    44-51 also refers to "they" and that the Appellant was not at  home  at
    the time but in the bazaar. The reference to Sher Alam at hearing reply
    46 does not indicate Sher Alam was present when his father was  killed.
    At 2015 interview reply 15 the Appellant stated that both Sher Alam and
    Sayyaff killed his father. At reply 19 he said he had  last  seen  Sher
    Alam in 1992 but did not place him at the family  home.  There  was  no
    explanation why Sher Alam should have a greater  interest  in  wreaking
    revenge than his brother whose son is said to have been executed by the
    Najibullah regime. There is no material reference to Hamidullah at 2003
    interview reply 46 dealing with the incident of his father's  death  or
    at his 2005 and 2015 interviews or any of his later statements.

62. There was no explanation for the Appellant's statement para  9  of  his
    2009 statement at AB p139 that on his return in late 2007 the Appellant
    considered that Sher Alam "believed he was wanted for the death of  his
    nephew" and detention of  his  brother.  This  type  of  expression  to
    describe what the Appellant thought of Sher Alam's  intentions  towards
    him does not sit easily with the claimed "blood feud" with  Sher  Alam.
    Dr Taghipour in his report at AB pp50-51 does not record the  Appellant
    stating Sher Alam was present when his father  was  killed  or  arrived
    immediately afterwards while the Mujahideen were still in the area  and
    able to arrest him. At the October 2017 hearing at replies 43-46 and at
    para 12 of his 2014 statement at AB p172 the Appellant claimed both  he
    and Sher Alam were present when his father was killed.  These  apparent
    inconsistencies remain unreconciled.

63. At his 2003 interview replies 84, 87, 89 and 90 the  Appellant  claimed
    his brother had been killed in Maidan  at  his  maternal  uncle's  home
    variously in May 2002 and in October 2001 and at the time he  had  been
    absent in nearby fields. There was  no  explanation  for  the  material
    difference in time and season between these two dates.

64. At para 11 of his 2014 statement at AB p172 the Appellant explained why
    he considers he is at risk as a revenge victim of Sher Alam. This  does
    not sit easily with the opportunities he states at para 9 of  the  same
    statement for Sher Alam to have had his  revenge  while  the  Appellant
    spent 6 months in his private detention centre: see also  October  2017
    hearing replies 47-50.

65. I turn to events subsequent to the Appellant's return to Afghanistan in
    2007. In his statement of May 2009 at para 7 the  Appellant  states  he
    went to Paghman: see AB p 139. He claims that while  there  he  learned
    that Sher Alam had been advised of his return and he decided to  leave.
    He states he went to Kabul and from there to Kandahar with  a  view  to
    travelling to Pakistan. He was stopped  at  the  border,  held  at  the
    police station while his identity was checked and  sent  the  following
    day to prison in Kandahar.

66. At the hearing I indicated I would be referring to a map of Afghanistan
    and not relying on the diagrammatic map in Mr Foxley's expert report at
    AB p325. I have used a  map  of  Afghanistan  scale  1:  1M  from  ITMB
    Publishing Vancouver. There is no reason given  why  arrangements  were
    made for the Appellant to travel from Paghman to Kandahar,  a  distance
    of some 500 km which the Appellant stated at AB  p  140a  and  at  2015
    interview replies 77-78 he was able to traverse in 4 or 5  hours.  This
    would appear to be a remarkably rapid journey  even  allowing  for  the
    comparative (by Afghani standards) quality of the road.  There  was  no
    explanation why he did not travel by the shorter route of just over 100
    kms from Kabul to the border at Tower Kham. At 2015  interview  replies
    32 and 35 the Appellant stated he was arrested on the border at Chaman.
    Chaman is well inside Pakistan. The border town is Vesh. There  was  no
    explanation for this apparent inconsistency or how the Afghans would be
    able to arrest him at  a  place  well  within  Pakistan  and  hold  him
    overnight in a police station there.

67. The medical evidence for the Appellant comprises Dr Taghipour's  report
    of 21 October 2003, Dr Campbell's psychiatric  report  of  24  November
    2003 and letters of 18 November 2010  and  1  February  2017  from  the
    Appellant's GP. The 2017  letter  states  the  Appellant  suffers  from
    depression and anxiety associated with sleep disturbance. At  the  time
    he was "prescribed amitriptyline for  his  symptoms  unfortunately  his
    symptoms have not improved much. This is partly due to  present  social
    circumstances." The GP writes that treatment is likely to be long-term.
    The 2010 letter refers to additional complaints and medications  so  it
    would appear over  the  intervening  six  years  there  has  been  some
    improvement. The 2003 expert reports have not been updated.

68. Dr Taghipour's expert opinion  is  that  the  Appellant's  scarring  is
    "likely to be consistent" with his account. There are appended  to  his
    report comments about torture and rape the latter of which seems to  be
    of no relevance the body of the report which is limited to scarring and
    contains a suggestion the Appellant should be psychologically assessed.
    Dr Campbell's report diagnosis is a Major Depressive Episode and  Post-
    Traumatic Stress Disorder. The recorded evidence in  the  report  other
    than the Appellant's personal and family history is  extremely  limited
    and without any reference to any of  the  standard  textbook  criteria.
    There is a concluding recommendation that the Appellant be assessed  by
    his local  Community  Mental  Health  Team  and  a  prognosis  that  if
    untreated the Appellant's condition will deteriorate.

69. There is also an undated (but  from  internal  information  it  can  be
    placed as prepared at the end of 2016) report from a Nurse Assessor  on
    the Appellant's wife recommending  a  change  in  her  medication.  The
    report refers to her as depressed and  suffering  from  symptoms  which
    include nightmares, flashbacks and hyper-vigilance,  variable  appetite
    and poor concentration and memory.

70. Mr Foxley at para 13 of his expert report states that:

         "It is difficult to give a confident  assessment:  verification  of
         many of the events your client describes is problematic  given  the
         fact that  many  of  these  events  are  spread  over  decades  and
         Afghanistan's infrastructure, after several decades of  destructive
         conflict, has hindered preservation of data. But the  core  aspects
         of your client's account are plausible"

    He then goes on to identify the violent pursuit of "blood feuds", human
    rights abuses by warlords including Sher Alam and the imprisonment  and
    execution  of  many  former  communists  following  the  fall  of   the
    Najibullah regime. At para 27 he identifies Sher Alam as a  lower-level
    local warlord and as having been involved  in  land  appropriations  in
    Paghman.

71. At para 30 he refers to the Appellant's escape from Kandahar prison and
    confirms the:

         "... spectacular Taliban-organised prison  break  ...  On  13  June
         2008,  involving  use  of  2  suicide  bombers  (hence  the  2  big
         explosions your client refers to) and the  escape  of  around  1000
         prisoners ... The incident was well documented in the media."

72. At paras 31-37 he notes extensive police corruption in  Kabul  and  the
    lack of sufficiency of protection as well as the still regular  Taliban
    and attacks there. Since the date of the report, there have  been  some
    serious incidents reported in the UK national press of bombings.

73. At paragraphs 45-47 he addresses  the  bleak  situation  the  Appellant
    would face on return to Kabul if unable to rely  on  a  family  support
    network. Para 10. 2 of the Home Office Country Policy  and  Information
    Note of August 2017 refers to information from Australia and the United
    Nations that:

         'Kabul's rapid growth has put pressure on  its  infrastructure  ...
         Approximately  64%  of  dwellings  in  the  city   are   considered
         "informal". The quality of housing and infrastructure  in  informal
         areas varies greatly and has unreliable access  to  infrastructure.
         Rents in Kabul tend to be expensive compared to most other parts of
         Afghanistan. As a result, many residents of Kabul live in  informal
         settlements.

         ... Some estimates suggested Kabul grew by some 1200 people per day
         owing to the influx of displaced and returnees. At the time of  the
         visit [October 2016], more than  50  informal  sites  around  Kabul
         housed an estimated 55,000 internally displaced persons  ...  Large
         parts of the city remain extremely poor.

         ...  Unemployment  was  estimated  to   be   widespread   ...   And
         underemployment is also common. Influx of IDPs and returnees to the
         city has put pressure on the local labour market.'

74. The Upper Tribunal in AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  {2012]  UKUT
    00163 (IAC) at paras 77-80 and 243 addressed the situation in Kabul and
    of IDPs there. In the intervening period of five years,  the  situation
    in Kabul is fluid. There was no evidence before me  to  suggest  it  is
    currently any better than it was in 2012. Recent reports in  the  media
    about Taliban bombings and the increased extent of Taliban  control  or
    influence throughout many areas of Afghanistan, including Kabul,  might
    indicate the position has deteriorated.

75. The Respondent made no specific challenge to Mr Foxley's expert report.
    He was engaged in country research on Afghanistan for the  UK  Ministry
    of Defence from 2001 to 2012 for which work he  was  made  MBE.  He  is
    experienced in the preparation of reports for the Tribunal and  subject
    to issues of the Appellant's credibility, I give substantial weight  to
    his report.

76. I accept Dr Taghipour's report that the Appellant's scarring is  likely
    to be attributable to wounding as a  result  of  a  grenade  blast.  Dr
    Campbell's report on the Appellant's mental health condition is some 13
    years old. It might  be  an  accurate  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    condition at the end of 2003 but its conclusions  are  quite  different
    from the Appellant's condition as described by his GP in 2010 and early
    2017. There was no more recent medical evidence for the  Appellant.  In
    these circumstances and noting the Appellant  has  now  been  re-united
    with his wife and son, I give reduced  weight  to  Dr  Campbell's  2003
    report.

77. The Appellant's bundle includes five  handwritten  documents  of  which
    translations of only four have been supplied. They are a letter  of  21
    March 1990 of recommendation of the Appellant by a group leader of  the
    5th Security Headquarters Youth Organisation. The next letter is of  30
    April 2002 requiring production of the Appellant  at  Military  Command
    Headquarters of the Ezhar. No further details are given.  There  is  no
    indication where and when the Appellant is to be produced or in respect
    of what matter. The third document is dated 12 December 2005 under  the
    hand of Sher Alam ordering the arrest of the  appellant  as  an  active
    member of the Communist  regime  and  the  person  who  "had  committed
    numerous crimes against the Islamic movement and  legitimate  Jihad  of
    Afghan people. He personally betrayed not only my family but  also  the
    Islamic movement." The letter is dated at a time when Sher Alam was the
    Governor of Ghazni province: see para 29 of Mr Foxley's  report  at  AB
    pp332-333. The fourth letter is of 26 January  2006  from  the  village
    chief of Khaldari in Paghman district. It re-iterates  the  Appellant's
    claim about Sher Alam wanting to kill him to take revenge for the death
    of  his  brother  and  his  nephew.The  letter  acknowledges  that  the
    information contained in it comes from the  Appellant's  father-in-law.
    Consequently, I am not able to treat it as independent evidence but  as
    evidence from an interested party and so  at  best  can  attach  little
    weight to it.

78. The Appellant's wife gave oral testimony. She had arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 9 September 2015  and  stated  she  made  contact  with  her
    husband on 17 September 2015 She was asked about her medical  condition
    additions and was able only to give the replies. She did not appear  to
    have any understanding of the complaints from which she suffered or  of
    the medical advice she had been given. She accepted that the  parts  of
    her statement of 9  January  2017  relating  to  the  Appellant  simply
    reflected what he had told her to say: see hearing replies 161-164.  At
    the end of the wife's evidence, Ms Isherwood informed  me  she  had  an
    outstanding application for judicial review:  she  did  not  have  full
    details but believed it related to issues surrounding the fact that she
    had claimed asylum in the Netherlands and the impact of the  provisions
    of Dublin III. I took the view that at such a  late  stage  the  better
    course was to proceed with the disposal of her husband's appeal.

79.  I  have  already  pointed  out  a  number  of  difficulties  with  the
    Appellant's evidence and that much of it was vague and appeared  to  be
    given in an evasive manner. I accept to the lower standard that he  and
    his family were involved in KhaD and that his  father  and  a  brother,
    both of whom served in KhaD, met violent deaths.  I  also  accept  that
    some  family  owned  land  was  the  subject  of  unlawful  or   forced
    expropriation by Hamidullah, a junior commander under  Sher  Alam.  For
    the reasons already given, I do not accept the Appellant's account that
    Sher Alam was present when his father was killed.

80. For the reasons already given, I do not find the Appellant's account of
    his first detention by Sher Alam to be credible and consequently  I  do
    not find his claim to have survived a grenade blast when  he  tried  to
    escape from a moving truck to be credible. I accept in the light of the
    medical evidence that he has survived a grenade blast but not  that  it
    happened in the way he narrated. I do not find it credible that if Sher
    Alam wanted to take revenge on the Appellant he or  his  minions  would
    have  arranged  treatment  of  the  Appellant  by  a  doctor  for   his
    psychological  problems  while  detained  and  in  hospital   following
    injuries sustained during his claimed escape. I find the Appellant  has
    used the connection between Hamidullah and Sher Alam as the  basis  for
    fabricating, with serious inconsistencies  nevertheless,  much  of  the
    substance of his claim.

81. There was no explanation or evident reason  why  the  Appellant  should
    have moved from Paghman to Kandahar in order to cross the  border  into
    Pakistan, when the distances are so much greater  via  Kandahar.  There
    was no explanation how  the  Appellant  could  have  been  arrested  by
    Afghanis some distance over the border  with  Pakistan.  As  Mr  Foxley
    points  out,  the  jailbreak  from  Kandahar   was   extremely   widely
    publicised. For the reasons already mentioned I do  not  find  credible
    even to the lower standard the Appellant's  account  of  what  happened
    subsequent to his return in 2007 to Afghanistan. Similarly, his  wife's
    evidence adds no weight to the Appellant's case.

82. I have already expressed concerns about the letter of  30  April  2002.
    This leaves the letter of 12 December 2005 requiring the arrest of  the
    Appellant said to come from Sher Alam.  Given  my  adverse  credibility
    findings in respect of the connection claimed  by  the  Appellant  with
    Sher Alam and applying the jurisprudence of  Tanveer  Ahmed  (Documents
    unreliable and forged) *[2002] UKIAT 00439, I attach little  weight  to
    this letter. It was unfortunate there was no evidence to  confirm  that
    the handwriting of the bulk of the letter was different  from  that  of
    the signature said to be of Sher Alam.

83. The Appellant served in KhaD for a comparatively short period  of  time
    and on his own account in a junior position, if only by reason  of  his
    youth. I am satisfied that his service in KhaD and the passage of  time
    since the fall of the Najibullah regime and the deaths  of  his  father
    and brother will not be likely to place him at real risk on  return  on
    account of his or their connections  with  KhaD,  particularly  in  the
    light of  my  adverse  findings  about  the  strength  of  the  claimed
    connection with Sher Alam: see para 36 of the determination in  SO  and
    SO (KhaD - members and family) Afghanistan CG [2006] UKAIT 00003.

84. The Appellant's appeal on  Refugee  Convention  grounds  is  dismissed.
    There was no individual claim for  humanitarian  protection  under  the
    Qualification Directive. Neither evidence nor submissions were  put  to
    me to support such a claim. The circumstances of the Appellant even  if
    he returns with his wife and son to his home  area  Paghman  or  nearby
    Kabul are not such as to fall within the scope of the  findings  in  AK
    (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC). The  burden  is
    on the Appellant and has not been discharged. Consequently,  any  claim
    for humanitarian protection has not been made out.

85. There remains the Appellant's claim under Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention. The  Appellant's  wife  evidently  has  some  psychological
    difficulties and notably to have limited mental resilience. Their child
    is  a  minor  and  so  by  definition  vulnerable.  The  Appellant  has
    effectively been out of Afghan society since 2002. His wife states that
    she and their son arrived in the Netherlands in 2014: see  para  18  of
    her statement at  AB  p315.  She  and  her  son  have  been  away  from
    Afghanistan and in western Europe for almost 4 years, years which  will
    have been very formative for him. On return there is a real  risk  that
    they will be perceived as "westernised".

86. The real prospect is that they will  find  accommodation  in  what  the
    Upper Tribunal described as tents or  unplanned  areas  or  in  illegal
    settlements with poor sanitation and lack of access  to  safe  drinking
    water in a place which has been abandoned by  the  government  and  aid
    agencies: see para 80 of  AK  and  which  the  2015  Australian  report
    referred to at  para  10.2  of  the  Home  Office's  August  2017  Note
    describes as "informal settlements". I also bear in mind  the  comments
    of Mr Foxley already referred to at para 73. The Appellant's home  area
    is close to Kabul. I find the Appellant and his family on return  would
    be in a situation tantamount to a state of  destitution  which  coupled
    with their vulnerability will amount to inhuman or degrading  treatment
    such as to engage the  State's  obligations  under  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention.

87. Although the appeal of the husband Appellant is  before  the  Tribunal,
    his wife and son  have  made  claims  and  are  in  every  respect  his
    dependants. The claims have not been conjoined but it seems to me  that
    the circumstances of the family as a unit should be taken into  account
    in the consideration of the Appellant's appeal. I find the  Appellant's
    circumstances will be considerably more difficult  if  he  is  returned
    with his wife and son or if he is returned alone and his wife  and  son
    follow. I see little point in considering the splitting of  the  family
    between Afghanistan and either the United Kingdom or  the  Netherlands.
    In the circumstances of this appeal, such an approach would not pay any
    respect to the individuals' family life and would amount to a breach of
    the obligations imposed on the State  by  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention sufficiently serious to engage those obligations.

88. The Appellant did not seek to amend the grounds of appeal to include  a
    claim in respect of his family life now that  his  wife  and  son  have
    arrived in the United Kingdom. Other than the  fact  that  they  are  a
    family unit there was no evidence  and  no  submissions  were  made  to
    support such a claim.

Anonymity

89. There was no request for a continuance of the anonymity  direction  and
    having heard the appeal I consider none is warranted.



NOTICE OF DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

    The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian grounds.

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3).

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 13. ii. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 13. ii. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

