
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13545/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th January 2018                          |On 26th February 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 master h e
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gaffer, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  1999.   The
    Appellant's application for asylum was refused by a Notice  of  Refusal
    dated 22nd November 2016.  That decision was appealed and  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Khawar sitting at Taylor House on 10th
    January 2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  13th  February
    2017 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds and the Appellant was found not to be in need  of  humanitarian
    protection.

 2. The appeal from that decision following a grant of permission to appeal
    by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam dated 31st July 2017 came  before  me
    to determine whether or not there was a material error of law  on  22nd
    September  2017.   At  that  hearing  the  Appellant  appeared  by  his
    instructed Counsel Mr Butterworth and the Secretary  of  State  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Nath.   At  a  preliminary  issue  Mr
    Butterworth produced to the Tribunal a letter dated 22nd November  2016
    from the UK Visa and Immigration Asylum Operations  Department  Croydon
    which purported to grant refugee status to the Appellant.  This was the
    first time that Mr Nath had had sight of this document.  It was  agreed
    that if the document was correct  then  the  proceedings  before  Judge
    Khawar in January were a nullity.  It was relevant and of  interest  to
    note that both the Notice of Refusal and the grant  of  refugee  status
    were issued on the same day and had the same reference number.  Mr Nath
    sought an adjournment so as  to  determine  the  exact  status  of  the
    Appellant.  He acknowledged that in the event that  the  Appellant  had
    been granted refugee status then the correct process would be  for  him
    to apply to withdraw the appeal.  He did  point  out  that  there  were
    other possible scenarios.

 3. In such circumstances I made directions.  These in essence were:

      i) that the Appellant's appeal stood adjourned;

     ii) that the Secretary of State must advise the Tribunal as to  whether
         or not the Appellant has or has not been granted refugee status and
         in the event that the Appellant had not been granted refugee status
         then the Secretary of State must set out in writing the reasons why
         their letter of 22nd November 2016 was written;

    iii) that in the event it was conceded that the decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge was a nullity that the Secretary of State would
         forthwith withdraw the Notice of Refusal and the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge would be set aside;

     iv) that in the event that it was contended by the Secretary  of  State
         that the Notice of Refusal was valid  and  remained  in  force  the
         matter would be relisted before me and that Mr  Nath  would  attend
         the restored hearing.

 4. It is on that basis the matter comes back before me.   It  is  conceded
    firstly that Mr Nath is not in attendance and secondly that no  further
    steps have been taken by the Secretary of State.  None of this  is  the
    fault of Ms Everett.

 5. I am gratefully assisted by the contribution made at this stage  by  Mr
    Gaffer on behalf of the Appellant.  He has conceded that there  was  an
    error in interpretation and that what was issued was a grant  of  leave
    on account of the Appellant being an unaccompanied minor, and  that  it
    was an error to indicate or construe that he had been  granted  refugee
    status.  In terms of legitimate expectation it  is  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is aware that he has been refused.  On that basis despite the
    fact that no specific documentation has been provided to  the  Tribunal
    in accordance with my directions nor that Mr  Nath  is  present  it  is
    agreed that the matter should proceed today without further adjournment
    as an error of law hearing.  The Secretary of State is now  represented
    by Ms Everett and the Appellant by Mr  Gaffer.   A  previous  anonymity
    direction had been made and no application is made to vary  that  order
    and it will remain in place.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Gaffer relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He submits  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has failed to address the issues set out in AK  (Article
    15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT  00163  (IAC)  and  that  individuals
    could not be returned to certain  dangerous  districts  in  Afghanistan
    which are under Taliban control.  He  specifically  relies  thereon  on
    paragraph 244 which states:

         "In relation to Ghazni, however, we note that it is  accepted  that
         there are significant numbers of districts in that  province  under
         Taliban control (although not  the  city  itself)  and  we  do  not
         exclude that, for most civilians in such districts that is a factor
         that may make it unreasonable for them to relocate there,  although
         that is not to say that a person with a history of  family  support
         for the Taliban, would have difficulties; much will depend  on  the
         particular circumstances of  the  case.   Outside  Taliban  control
         districts, however, we do not find that internal  relocation  would
         in general be unreasonable."

 7. He submits that the judge was under a  duty  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant's province and district was under effective  Taliban  control
    and thus whether it was unreasonable for the Appellant to return there.
     He submits that paragraph 44 of the decision  does  not  address  this
    pointing out that the judge does note that  the  Appellant  comes  from
    Ghazni but she does not consider at any  stage  whether  in  line  with
    country evidence as required by AK  that  the  Taliban  have  effective
    control of the area and that she fails to do so despite noting that the
    Appellant alleges that his family are not  safe  in  their  village  in
    Afghanistan due to Taliban influence in the area.  He submits therefore
    that there has been failure of  anxious  scrutiny  and  that  there  is
    consequently a material error of law that makes the decision unsafe.

 8. Secondly Mr Gaffer submits that there has been inadequate consideration
    by the judge as to whether internal relocation was safe or  reasonable.
    He notes that the First-tier Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 55  that
    internal relocation to Kabul would be available and that the  Appellant
    has family members who would be able to assist him if he returned.   He
    submits that the judge has failed to make findings and that there is  a
    lack of evidence that the Appellant's extended family would be  willing
    and able to provide genuine support to the Appellant in practice.

 9. Finally he turns to the finding that the judge held that the  Appellant
    was not at risk of being kidnapped and that his account was  incredible
    in this regard.  On the other hand  he  notes  the  judge  appeared  to
    accept that the Appellant's brother-in-law was wealthy.   He  considers
    that the judge has at paragraph 50 made only limited findings  relating
    to the oral evidence of Mr A and submits that it is hard  to  see  what
    the judge was actually saying and that it  is  difficult  to  see  what
    other evidence the Appellant could have produced.

10. In response Ms Everett points out that the judge found the  Appellant's
    testimony not to be credible and he gave cogent reasons for this  which
    are mainly  unchallenged.   She  notes  that  the  judge  rejected  the
    Appellant's account in its entirety.  So far as the issue of return  is
    concerned as addressed by the judge in paragraph 55 Ms Everett  submits
    that the judge looked at the issues in the alternative and accepted the
    position as set out within the reasons of refusal letter.  The issue of
    the Appellant coming from  a  family  of  wealth  was  that  the  judge
    accepted that money would be available and that the case had  not  been
    made out that the Appellant was at risk  of  kidnapping.   She  submits
    that the judge has done sufficient.

11. In brief response Mr Gaffer submits that the  credibility  findings  at
    paragraph 50 (regarding the issue of ransom) infect  the  remainder  of
    the credibility findings and the judge  had  failed  to  give  due  and
    proper consideration to paragraph 244 of AK.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. The starting point  in  this  decision  are  the  judge's  findings  on
    credibility.  The judge made adverse findings of credibility.  She  has
    given cogent reasons.  I accept that a proper approach  to  credibility
    requires an assessment of the evidence and of  the  general  claim  and
    that in asylum claims relevant factors will be the internal consistency
    of  the  claim,  the  inherent  plausibility  of  the  claim  and   the
    consistency of the claim with external factors of  the  sort  typically
    found in country guidance.  I further accept that it  is  theoretically
    correct that a claimant need do no more than state his claim  but  that
    claim  still  needs  to  be  examined  for  consistency  and   inherent
    plausibility.  In this case the judge has carried out  a  detailed  and
    analytic approach culminating in her conclusion at paragraph 54 whereby
    she concludes that the Appellant  has  failed  to  submit  satisfactory
    evidence to establish even to the standard of a  reasonable  degree  of
    probability that his factual account is true.

15. I note the challenges made by Mr Gaffer.  I am not satisfied that  they
    show material errors of law.  The  judge  has  looked  at  the  factual
    situation of this particular case, and analysed deeply  the  issues  of
    risk of kidnapping and a risk of return.   Ultimately  the  finding  of
    adverse credibility is well reasoned and one that the judge, who  heard
    the evidence, was entitled to reach.  In such circumstances it is  hard
    to see that the submissions of Mr Gaffer amount  to  little  more  than
    disagreement with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    Consequently I find that the decision discloses no  material  error  of
    law and the appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and the anonymity order  will  remain
in place.


Signed                              Date 23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
