
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13923/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13th December 2017                 |On 22nd January 2018                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    BEO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  8th  August  1977.   The
    Appellant was originally issued with a  visa  as  a  Tier  5  religious
    worker on 9th August 2012.  That visa was subsequently varied  but  the
    Appellant claimed asylum on 25th May 2016 and her claim was  lodged  on
    9th June 2016.  The Appellant is in the UK with her  daughter  aged  12
    and her son aged 10.

 2. It was the Appellant's claim that her  husband  had  been  abusing  her
    since the start of her marriage in 2004  and  that  she  fears  further
    abuse and that her husband has threatened to subject  her  daughter  to
    FGM.  The Appellant's application was  refused  by  Notice  of  Refusal
    dated 30th November 2016.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Brunnen sitting at Manchester on 18th January 2017.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 9th February 2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant has acted in person throughout.  She  lodged  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan  on  24th  May  2017.   Renewed
    handwritten Grounds of Appeal were submitted by the  Appellant  on  7th
    June 2017.  The principal thrust of the Grounds of Appeal is a  failure
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  consider  the  risk  pursuant  to
    Article 2 of the European Convention of Human Rights that her  daughter
    would be subjected to FGM if she is  returned  to  Nigeria  emphasising
    that her husband's family work at the airport and her prospect of being
    able to freely enter Nigeria  without  coming  to  their  attention  is
    unlikely.

 5. On 13th July 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Plimmer considered that it was arguable that  given  the
    Appellant's failed attempts at obtaining employment in Nigeria over  an
    extended period of time the only practical way for her to  support  her
    daughters would involve advertising her presence in Lagos and in  those
    circumstances the First-tier Tribunal arguably erred in law in  finding
    that the family could  internally  relocate  to  Lagos.   Secondly  she
    considered it was arguable that the employment conditions in Lagos  for
    the Appellant are worse by reason of her  inability  to  advertise  her
    services which arises out  of  a  fear  of  persecution  which  it  was
    accepted to be well-founded in her home area and if tracked down by her
    husband/his family in Lagos.

 6. On 26th July 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes before
    me to determine whether or not there is a material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  in
    person.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Diwnycz.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. I explained in detail to the Appellant that I was  not  rehearing  this
    matter that it was necessary for her to show that there  were  material
    errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I  did
    indicate however that I would listen without interruption  to  anything
    the Appellant had to say.  The Appellant responded that the  thrust  of
    her appeal is to protect her daughter from being subjected  to  FGM  by
    her husband and that for her to return with  her  daughter  to  Nigeria
    would be extremely risky to the child.  She emphasised that she has  to
    go through Lagos Airport and that members of her husband's family  work
    at the airport and it is highly probable in her  view  that  she  would
    come to their attention.  She is concerned that returning her to  Lagos
    would not enable her to protect her daughter.  She relied on an  e-mail
    which postdates the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dated
    15th August to the Home Office.  Within  that  e-mail  the  Appellant's
    husband states that he comes from a Royal family, that he requires  his
    daughter "as soon as possible and that she belongs to him not her."  He
    openly states within that e-mail that the Appellant's daughter must  be
    circumcised before she becomes a teenager.

 8. I am further helped by Mr Diwnycz who indicates that there is  also  on
    file a report by way of referral  to  Social  Services  which  although
    dated November 2016  should  in  fact  read  November  2017  and  which
    therefore was not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  expressing
    concern for the wellbeing  of  the  Appellant  and  her  daughter.   He
    indicates that in such circumstances he will do no more than  leave  it
    to me to decide thus acknowledges that these documents  would  not  and
    could not have been available to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
    they may well have made a difference to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    decision.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. My starting point has to be that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  to
    have materially erred in law for me to set this  matter  aside.   Judge
    Brunnen is an extremely experienced and competent judge.  He has looked
    at the evidence very carefully.  However it is arguable that  the  only
    way that the Appellant  would  be  able  to  support  herself  and  her
    daughter would be by way of  advertising  her  presence  in  Lagos  and
    particularly bearing in mind that the Appellant's husband's family work
    at the airport it may not be practical for her to relocate there.

12. There are also two extremely telling pieces of additional evidence that
    are before me that were not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  They
    are  the  e-mail  from  the  Appellant's  husband  openly  stating  his
    intention to have his daughter subjected to FGM and secondly the report
    from Social Services.  Had the judge had those documents  in  front  of
    him he may have come to a different conclusion.  We  are  dealing  here
    with the prospect of serious harm to a child.  It would be a failing of
    the Tribunal Service for this information not  to  be  considered.   In
    such circumstances the correct approach is to set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to remit at the hearing back for  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

13. I hope that the Appellant will read this decision in full.  It  is  not
    for the Tribunal to direct whether or not the Appellant has or has  not
    legal representation.  I further understand the  financial  constraints
    under which the  Appellant  feels  she  may  be  placed.   However  two
    features arise from this appeal of which she should be aware.   Firstly
    she is only going to get this one opportunity to show to the court that
    her appeal should succeed.  She should ensure full and proper  evidence
    is before the court and it must be to her advantage and particularly to
    the advantage of her daughter who is the person she fears would  be  at
    risk, for her to ensure  that  she  is  properly  legally  represented.
    Secondly the Appellant should be made aware that just because there  is
    additional information that does not mean that another judge would  not
    come to exactly the same decision as that of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  All the more reason  for  her  to  take  steps  to  be  legally
    represented.  The Tribunal cannot of course force her to do so but  she
    must be aware of the risks she runs in acting in person if she  chooses
    not to do so.  Directions for the rehearing of this matter are set  out
    below.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside with none of the findings of  fact  to  stand.   Directions
for the rehearing of this matter are set out below.

 1) The finding that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains
    a material error of law and is set aside.  The  Appellant's  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester on the  first
    available date 42 days hence with an ELH of three hours.   The  hearing
    is to be before any Immigration  Judge  other  than  Immigration  Judge
    Brunnen.

 2) That there be leave to either party to  file  and  serve  a  bundle  of
    objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they seek  to  rely  at
    least seven days prior to the restored hearing.
 3) That in the event that the Appellant requires  an  interpreter  she/her
    legal representatives must notify the Tribunal within fourteen days  of
    receipt of these directions.

The First-tier Tribunal granted the Appellant anonymity.  No application  is
made to vary that order and the anonymity direction will remain in place.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 9th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 9th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
