
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13256/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|8 November 2018                               |15 November 2018              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PN
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by York Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 13 August 2018  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I Ross which allowed the appeal of PN on protection
    grounds.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to PN as the appellant and to
    the Secretary of State as the respondent,  reflecting  their  positions
    before the First-Tier Tribunal.

 3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 4. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.

 5. The First-Tier Tribunal found that the  appellant  had  been  extremely
    seriously mistreated in Sri Lanka  in  2014  as  he  was  suspected  of
    supporting the LTTE and being active in the  UK  in  support  of  Tamil
    independence. That part  of  his  claim  was  supported  by  an  almost
    contemporaneous physical medical report showing freshly incurred wounds
    and serious injuries "typical" of the type of mistreatment  claimed  by
    the appellant.  On  return  to  the  UK  after  this  mistreatment  the
    appellant claimed asylum and began to be an  active  supporter  of  the
    TGTE. The appellant attempted suicide in 2018 after he heard his father
    had been arrested.  A period as an in-patient in a mental  health  unit
    followed and he has been on anti-depressants thereafter.

 6. Ms Everett conceded that the grounds and materials relied upon for  the
    respondent were not capable of showing judicial bias. The  respondent's
    ground  as  argued  before  me  was  that  there  had  been  procedural
    unfairness where the First-Tier Tribunal Judge had found the  appellant
    to be a vulnerable witness  and  restricted  cross-examination  on  the
    appellant's credibility. The grounds also maintained  that  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal had acted unfairly in questioning the credibility  points
    made in the Presenting Officer's submissions but had not done so during
    the submissions of the appellant's representative.

 7. I did not find that the grounds had  merit.  The  Presenting  Officer's
    note of proceedings states that he  agreed,  albeit  reluctantly,  that
    cross-examination should be restricted  because  the  appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness. There is no suggestion that  the  appellant  should
    have been treated other than as a vulnerable witness given the  medical
    evidence  provided.  The  First-Tier  Tribunal   followed   the   Joint
    Presidential  Guidance  on  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult   and   Sensitive
    Appellants correctly in controlling  the  manner  of  questioning;  see
    paragraph 10.2 (iv). The  First-Tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  have
    formed a preliminary view of the evidence  and  test  that  out  during
    submissions. Exploring or querying the strength of submissions is  not,
    without more, something capable of showing procedural impropriety.  The
    Presenting Officer's note of hearing objects to  interruptions  to  his
    submissions but does not specify how the  judge's  interruptions  could
    amount to the level of procedural unfairness. That is  additionally  so
    where it  would  appear  that  the  submissions  on  credibility  were,
    notwithstanding the judge's interventions, still made.

 8. It was therefore my  conclusion  that  the  grounds  did  not  disclose
    procedural error and that the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  was
    lawful.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed: [pic]                                Date: 8 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

