
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13390/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2019                            |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                            mr Rebaz Anwar Jalal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Bhachu, Counsel, instructed by Genesis Law
                    Associates Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity, has  permission
    to challenge the decision of Judge O'Garro of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) sent on 24 October 2017 dismissing his appeal against a  decision
    made by the respondent on  8  December  2017  refusing  his  protection
    claim.

2.   The grounds allege that the judge erred in law in  (1)  departing  from
    Tribunal country guidance as set out in AA (Iraq) [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)
    which identified  the  appellant's  home  area  of  Salah-al-Din  as  a
    "contested area" at the  level  of  Article  15(c)  general  risk;  (2)
    wrongly concluding that the appellant had or would be able to obtain  a
    CSID, as he did not possess a CSID and his family was  in  Salah-al-Din
    and so could not reasonably be expected to obtain one  on  his  behalf;
    and (3) in finding that the appellant  would  have  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative in the IKR, when he would not be able to  obtain
    the necessary travel documents or CSID.

3.   I am grateful to both representatives for their pertinent  submissions.



4.   I find none of the appellant's grounds made out.

5.   As regards  ground  (1),  whilst  the  judge  did  not  cite  case  law
    principles clarifying that cogent reasons were required  for  departing
    from Tribunal country guidance (SG (Iraq) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940),  the
    judge's decision evinces a very cogent reason  for  departing  from  AA
    (Iraq), namely that the country background information  disclosed  that
    only those parts of Salah-al-Din touching the Baghdad Belts remain  now
    in a contested area.  Coupled with the judge's specific finding of fact
    in the same paragraph that the appellant's ability to go in and out  of
    Salah-al-Din made it unlikely he was  from  the  contested  part,  this
    evidence  afforded  sufficient  basis  to   depart   from   AA   [2015]
    particularly given that it was corroborated by evidence in  the  public
    realm that ISIS was not any longer a force in this area.

6.   Ms Bhachu sought to argue that the CIPIN report -  just  one  report  -
    was insufficient basis to depart from a Tribunal country guidance case.
     However, the methodology used in  the  CIPIN  report  is  to  draw  on
    multiple sources of  country  of  origin  information  (COI)  including
    reputable country reports.  The  appellant's  representatives  did  not
    adduce for the hearing before the judge any  recent  evidence  to  show
    that this area was still contested.  `Contrary to her submissions,  the
    judge did not seek to rely on the decision by Cranston J in R  (On  the
    application of Amin) v SSHD [2017] 2417 (Admin) as a factual  precedent
    in relation to Salah-al-Din (the case concerned Kirkuk),  but  for  the
    broader point that in considering  country  guidance  decisions  judges
    must have regard to what is happening on the ground.

7.   Ms Bhachu also  submitted  that  the  judge's  reliance  on  the  CIPIN
    involved procedural unfairness because  it  was  not  produced  at  the
    hearing and  so  must  have  been  identified  by  way  of  independent
    research.  Mr Mills was able to refer to a  note  on  the  respondent's
    file from the Presenting Officer who represented stating  that  he  had
    produced the CIPIN report at the hearing.  By contrast, Ms Bhachu  said
    she had not been able to establish from her own file whether the  CIPIN
    had been produced or not.  Given that it is for the appellant  to  make
    out his grounds and that the appellant's representatives have had ample
    time to establish what in their view was or was  not  produced  at  the
    hearing, that is simply not good enough.  The fact that this report  is
    not in the respondent's bundle does not help her argument, since on  Mr
    Mills' evidence the document was produced loose-leaf.  In short,  there
    is nothing to substitute the allegation that  the  judge  obtained  the
    CIPIN report proprio motu.

8.   At the end of the hearing before me, I gave an oral direction  that  Ms
    Bhachu had until the end of the day  to  confirm  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's representatives accepted  that  the  judge  had  accurately
    described the contents of the CIPIN report  relating  to  Salah-al-Din.
    Nothing was forthcoming to show any inaccuracy.

9.   As regards the appellant's ground (2), it must be borne  in  mind  that
    the judge made extensive adverse credibility findings,  none  of  which
    have been challenged, and made a specific finding that he has a  mother
    and brother in Salah-al-Din.  Given the judge's proper finding that the
    part of Salah-al-Din where the appellant's family lived was  not  in  a
    contested area, it was entirely in accordance with the Tribunal country
    guidance as modified by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AA  (Iraq)  and  as
    developed by the UT in BA [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC), to  conclude  that  the
    appellant would be able to  obtain  a  CSID.   The  fact  that  he  had
    obtained a passport  before  he  left  and  had  also  held  employment
    identity  documentation  further  bespoke  the  reasonableness  of  the
    judge's assessment regarding this matter.

10.  Ground (3) is devoid of arguable  merit.   Given  the  judge's  primary
    findings of fact, the appellant could return safely and  reasonably  to
    his home area of Salah-al-Din and so the findings made on relocation to
    the IKR were in the alternative and a challenge to them cannot found an
    error of law.  In any event, given the judge's findings  regarding  the
    CSID availability, coupled with the evidence  that  the  appellant  had
    worked in the IKR for two years and had a mother  who  originated  from
    there, it was clearly open to the judge  to  find  that  the  appellant
    would be safe in the IKR, could access that area and would not confront
    any significant difficulties or hardships there.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 2 January 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
