
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/13177/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7th June 2017                      |       On 28th June 2017              |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                   Mr e n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Short (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  his  protection
    claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow  ("the  judge")
    in a decision promulgated on 8th February 2017.  The judge  found  that
    he would not be at any real risk  on  return  to  Iran.   A  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge refused permission to appeal but,  following  a  renewed
    application, permission was granted by a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge on
    19th April 2017.  She found that there was merit in the contention that
    the judge did not properly engage with the evidence  and  that  it  was
    hard to see from the decision what the reasons were behind the  overall
    conclusion that the appellant did not impress as a credible witness.

2.   At the outset, Mr Wilding said that the  Secretary  of  State  accepted
    that the decision was not sustainable and  should  be  set  aside.   At
    paragraph 12, where the judge found broadly that the appellant was  not
    a credible witness, there appeared a list of facts but no  accompanying
    reasoning or analysis.  For example, it was not clear how the judge had
    weighed completion of the Alpha course and the appellant's  baptism  in
    finding that these were not determinative of the appellant's faith.  No
    reasons were given for the conclusion that the appellant's evidence was
    self-serving and in relation to Section 8 of the 2004  Act,  there  was
    insufficient to show why the judge gave as much weight  as  he  clearly
    did to the delay in claiming asylum and  the  appellant's  presence  in
    Greece.

3.   Ms Short agreed with Mr Wilding's analysis.

4.   Having read the decision  carefully,  I  conclude,  having  taken  into
    account the parties' agreement, that the decision should be  set  aside
    and remade as the absence of sufficient reasons showing how  the  judge
    reached his overall conclusions amounts to an error of law.

5.   The decision will be  remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  is
    clearly  the  appropriate  venue  in  the   circumstances.    A   Farsi
    interpreter will be required.  The hearing  will  be  de  novo  and  no
    findings of fact are preserved.  The appeal will be heard by  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Callow.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside as containing an  error
of law.

The decision will be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House,
before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow.

A Farsi interpreter will be required.

The hearing will be de novo with no findings of fact preserved.

Signed                                  Date 28 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

ANONYMITY

The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal  shall  continue  in
force until set aside or varied by a Tribunal or a court.

Signed                                  Date 28 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
