
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13696/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2018                                 |On 14 May 2018                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     an
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Imamovic, instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, AN is a male citizen of Iraq who was born in
    1972.  On 7 October 2014 the appellant was  convicted  at  Lewes  Crown
    Court for production of  a  class  B  controlled  drug  (cannabis)  and
    abstracting electricity.  He was sentenced to two years and six months'
    imprisonment.  His appeal against that decision was  dismissed  on  the
    papers  (25  September  2015).   The  appellant  made  further  written
    submissions, claiming that he was a homosexual but the fresh claim  was
    refused by a decision dated 28 November  2016  but  the  appellant  was
    given a right of appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge S Meah)  in  a
    decision promulgated on 27 April 2017, allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and (curiously) on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  together
    with Article 3 and Article 2 ECHR.  Having allowed the  asylum  appeal,
    it was not open to the  judge  to  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. There are two grounds of  appeal.   The  first  concerns  the
    judge's findings that the appellant was a homosexual.  The Secretary of
    State relies on AB  (Somalia)  [2004]  UKIAT  00125  in  particular  at
    paragraphs 4 and 8:

         "4. We have several difficulties with  the  Adjudicator's  reasons.
         First and foremost, he failed to give any reasons that  related  to
         the claimant's evidence as such or indeed to the witness's evidence
         as such. He relied simply on the fact that  the  claimant  and  his
         witness corroborated each other's accounts. In our view that was an
         error on his part. If A and B concur in their  evidence  that  does
         not without more prove that they are telling the truth, even  under
         the lower standard of proof. It may be that A and B are telling the
         truth; equally it may be they are  lying.  The  Adjudicator  should
         have identified something about the claimant's evidence, other than
         that it was corroborated, which made it creditworthy.

         ...

         8. A further difficulty was that the Adjudicator  did  not  explain
         why he considered the witness was to be  believed,  notwithstanding
         he was related to the claimant. Obviously, being  a  relative  does
         not prevent a person from giving truthful  testimony,  but  such  a
         person cannot be regarded as  a  wholly  independent  witness  and,
         given the decisive weight the Adjudicator sought to attach to  this
         man's evidence, it was incumbent on him to explain why he  did  not
         consider the family connection lessened the veracity of the account
         he gave. We are not helped by the Adjudicator`s failure to  clarify
         whether the witness was present during the appellant`s evidence: if
         the witness had not  been  present,  the  fact  that  his  evidence
         accorded with the  appellant`s  may  have  meant  it  carried  more
         weight. It may be that the Adjudicator, in assessing  the  witness,
         attached weight to the documentary evidence  showing  he  had  been
         granted refugee status, although in the absence of further evidence
         that the grant was made on the basis of the witness being from  the
         Shansiya tribe that may have added little. On all these matters  we
         simply do not know what was in the Adjudicator`s mind."

 3. The Secretary of State considered that the judge had  wrongly  rejected
    the discrepancies highlighted by the respondent in the  refusal  letter
    as "ancillary or peripheral" [42-43].

 4. In addition to the appellant, several  other  witnesses  gave  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal on his behalf.  The judge noted that the
    previous judge had not had the benefit of hearing from those  witnesses
    [25].  Given that the first judge had not heard from the witnesses  or,
    indeed, from the appellant himself given  that  it  had  been  a  paper
    appeal, the  judge  placed  limited  weight  on  the  previous  judge's
    decision.  The judge found that the appellant's "sexual history" was as
    claimed by him and included relationships with both women (he had  been
    married to a British woman previously) and also men.  The  judge  found
    that the appellant had spent the majority of his life "hiding the  true
    nature of his sexuality".  He accepted the appellant was openly gay  in
    the United Kingdom.  At [35], the judge considered the evidence of  the
    witnesses.  One of the witnesses gave evidence that the  appellant  had
    had a sexual relationship with her son.  He found this woman's evidence
    to be "particularly compelling".  The appellant's cousin's evidence was
    also accepted as credible [37] including the witness' belief  that  the
    appellant's relatives in Iraq knew of  his  sexual  activities  through
    Facebook.  The evidence of a housemate of the appellant [38]  was  also
    accepted as truthful.  This housemate had stated  that  "the  appellant
    had asked him permission to bring other gay men to the home when he was
    out and he had granted the appellant such  permission."   At  [41]  the
    judge found that the appellant had "gone to great  lengths  to  explain
    the background to his sexuality and how this has evolved and progressed
    over time culminating in the current position where he  now  positively
    identifies himself as an  openly  gay  man."   The  judge  specifically
    rejected the  Presenting  Officer's  submission  that  the  appellant's
    account was discrepant given that he had previously  described  himself
    as bisexual and was now gay.  The judge dealt with that  submission  at
    some length at [27-28].  The judge noted that Mr Hogg,  the  Presenting
    Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  had   cross-examined   the
    witnesses,  the  appellant  in  particular,   describing   the   cross-
    examination as "extensive and pertinent."

 5. I agree with Ms Imamovic that the  dictum  in  AS  (Somalia)  does  not
    readily apply to the judge's analysis  in  this  case.   This  was  not
    simply a case where the judge found the evidence of  various  witnesses
    to be consistent.  Indeed, at [45] the judge found that it  would  have
    been extremely difficult for the appellant to deceive  the  variety  of
    witnesses from very different social backgrounds who  had  attended  to
    give evidence on his behalf.  One of the witnesses was a cousin but the
    others were not related to him nor were they also homosexual men or the
    appellant's friends.  One witness was a housemate and the other a woman
    whose son had had a relationship with the appellant.   I  find  it  was
    open to  the  judge  to  find  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was
    strengthened by the fact that  this  diverse  group  of  witnesses  had
    testified on his behalf.  Further, the evidence of  the  witnesses  had
    given the judge context for the comprehensive account of his developing
    sexuality which had impressed the judge in the oral hearing.

 6. I find that it was open to the judge to accept the appellant's  account
    of his sexuality.  Indeed, if I were to accept the Secretary of State's
    argument, then it would follow that  any  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    exactly the same evidence including the  appellant  and  his  witnesses
    would be bound to conclude that the appellant had failed  to  discharge
    the burden of proof.  I do not accept that  that  can  be  right.   The
    judge's decision was neither perverse nor  was  his  analysis  anything
    other than cogent and thorough.

 7. Before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  parties  accepted  that,  if  the
    Tribunal found that the appellant was homosexual, he would be  at  risk
    on return to Iraq.  The judge found at [46] that  the  appellant  would
    wish to live as an openly gay man and that the only reason why he would
    conceal his sexuality in Iraq was in order to avoid persecution (see HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31).  Given that I have found that the judge did not
    err in law in his assessment of the evidence and the findings which  he
    reached, it follows that the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.  The second ground concerns  the  availability  of  internal
    flight for the appellant within Iraq.   That  ground  is  not  material
    given that the appellant will be  at  risk  as  a  homosexual  anywhere
    within Iraq.  I therefore make no ruling as regards the  second  ground
    of appeal.

Notice of Decision

 8. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 8 MAY 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 8 MAY 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



