
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13738/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6th November 2017                       |On 7th November 2017           |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     NB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Kirk, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  NB.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


   1. Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted permission to appeal the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal judge  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
      against the respondent's decision to refuse international  protection,
      in the following terms:


                  It is arguable that, although  the  Decision  and  Reasons
                  purports to give detailed reasons, when reading it it does
                  not in fact do so; rather it is more a  rehearsal  of  the
                  claim. In particular the judge said at paragraph  58  that
                  the claim is beset with inconsistencies but apart from one
                  that the judge says he discounted I can discern no  others
                  that  the  judge  identified.  It  is  arguable  that  the
                  Decision and Reasons is inadequately reasoned.


   2. Mr Tarlow, on behalf of  the  respondent  resiled  from  the  Rule  24
      response which sought to argue that the grounds were little more  than
      an attempt to reargue the appellant's appeal and accepted  that  there
      was a lack of resonating in the decision, a lack of identification  of
      the nature of the case, a failure  to  have  adequate  regard  to  the
      appellant's age and the decision was a mere recitation  of  the  claim
      with no reasoned findings.


   3. The First-tier Tribunal judge  erred  in  law  and  I  set  aside  the
      decision to be remade

         4. There have been no findings. The scheme of the Tribunals  Court
            and Enforcement Act  2007  does  not  assign  the  function  of
            primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.


         5. The  Practice  Statement  dated  25th  September  2012  of  the
            Immigration and Asylum Chamber First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
            Tribunal states:

                  7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion  to
                         proceed  to  re-make  the  decision,   instead   of
                         remitting the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
                         unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:(a) the
                         effect of the error has been  to  deprive  a  party
                         before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or
                         other opportunity for that party's case to  be  put
                         to and considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal;  or
                         (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact
                         finding  which  is  necessary  in  order  for   the
                         decision in the appeal to be re-made is such  that,
                         having regard to the overriding objective  in  rule
                         2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
                         tier Tribunal.

         6. Having regard to the evidence to be heard and the fact  finding
            required, I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
            heard afresh.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.
      Anonymity
    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).
                                        Date 6th November 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
