






Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13128/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 15th April 2019                    |On 31st May 2019                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                 Rawand [Y]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jonrose   instructed by Broudie, Jackson & Canter
                    solicitors

For the Respondent :   Mr Bates  Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on the 8th January 2019 whereby the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection or relief otherwise on the grounds of Article 2
    and 3 of the ECHR. Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro on 5th February 2019.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         3  The findings of the judge that the appellant  was  not  credible
         are properly reasoned applying the correct standard  of  proof.  In
         respect of the judge's findings on risk of return, it is noted that
         he did not take into account the recent CG case HB (Kurds) Iran  CG
         [2018] UKUT. The appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and paragraph 76
         the judge makes reference to the appellant's "Facebook  posts"  and
         that it had been put up to bolster his case. However, in HB (Kurds)
         Iran CG [2018] UKUT the Tribunal said this at paragraph 116:-

             "We are satisfied that the content  the  appellant's  Facebook
             page would become known to the authorities on return  as  part
             of the process of investigation of his background. That is the
             effect of the expert background  evidence  before  us.  It  is
             then, no step at all to the conclusion that this would involve
             a real risk of persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment in  his
             case"

         4  In light of what he said in HB  about  what  can  occur  at  the
         airport in Iran on return is arguable that the judge in failing  to
         consider this made an error of law. Permission is granted.

 5. That is the extent of the leave granted in respect of the judgement  by
    Judge Davies.

 6. Before me the appellant's representative sought to argue that the whole
    of the decision was flawed.

 7. It is to be noted that the appellant has had a previous asylum  appeal,
    Appeal number PA/07462/2016.  That asylum appeal was also based on  the
    appellant's claimed  conversion  to  Zoroastrianism  and  a  number  of
    incidents occurring in Iran. That appeal was dismissed on  19  December
    2016. Before me the issue of that previous decision was raised and what
    the impact of the findings in those proceeding was. The  representative
    for the respondent seeking to raise  adverse  credibility  findings  as
    being material, whilst the appellant's representative's  claim  it  was
    not part of the case that the appellant had  fabricated  parts  of  his
    account.

 8. In approaching the previous judgement Judge Davies has properly applied
    the guidance in the case of Devaseelan 2002 UKIAT 00702.  As  indicated
    by Judge O'Garro. Judge Davies has given valid reasons for reaching the
    conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  not  genuinely   a   convert   to
    Zoroastrianism. The judge has also given valid reasons for finding that
    he did not believe the appellant's account that his family  had  become
    aware of his involvement in Zoroastrianism by reason of posts  on  line
    including his Facebook posts and posts on YouTube.

 9. With regard to  the  submissions  by  the  respondent's  representative
    credibility is to be determined on the basis  of  the  evidence  before
    Judge Davies. Previous findings of fact stand unless  the  criteria  in
    Devaseelan are met. However the fact that an individual  may  not  have
    been truthful in the past  does  not  mean  that  they  are  not  being
    truthful  now.  The  judge  has  properly  approached  the   issue   of
    credibility in  making  findings  of  fact  and  properly  applied  the
    guidance in  the  case  law.  With  regard  to  the  assertion  by  the
    appellant's representative that it was not suggested that the appellant
    had fabricated an account, the judge  on  the  previous  occasions  had
    given valid reasons for finding the appellant's claims were  not  true.
    If the account were not  true  the  appellant  must  have  created  the
    account to substantiate his claim for asylum.

10. In the circumstances Judge Davies was entitled to approach  the  issues
    in the case in the manner that he has.    The  judge  has  given  valid
    reasons for finding the appellant's account was not credible. The judge
    has  also  considered  the  witnesses  and  given  valid  reasons   for
    discounting their evidence.

11. At Paragraph 115 of the decision the judge has started to consider  the
    issue of the Facebook posts. The judge noted despite the fact that  the
    appellant's account was that he had fled Iran  by  reason  in  part  of
    threats from his family the appellant claims to have  made  friends  of
    his family on Facebook. The  judge  has  identified  that  this  was  a
    deliberate attempt by the appellant to fabricate a claim.  That  was  a
    finding that the judge was entitled to make on the evidence presented.

12. The judge has given valid reasons for the finding  that  the  appellant
    was not a genuine convert to  Zoroastrianism.  There  is  therefore  no
    material error on the part  of  the  judge  in  assessing  whether  the
    appellant had genuinely converted to Zoroastrianism.

13. The issue thereafter is what would happen to the  appellant  on  return
    and would the appellant be at risk because of his  Facebook  posts.  On
    the basis of the findings of fact the judge was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the Facebook posts were deliberately put out by the  appellant  in
    an effort to fabricate account of being a convert, see Danian 1999 EWCA
    Civ 3000 and that there would be no reason for  the  appellant  not  to
    delete the posts. The judge was entitled to conclude that  there  would
    be no reason for the authorities in Iran to be checking the appellant's
    Facebook posts prior to his returning there.

14. The sole issue to be determined is whether or not the  appellant  would
    on return be viewed or perceived by the authorities in Iran as a person
    that has renounced Islam by reason of his Facebook posts at  the  point
    of re-entering the country. The issue not  being  whether  or  not  the
    appellant was a genuine convert, but whether the authorities in Iran on
    his return would, irrespective of whether he is a genuine convert, wish
    to see his face book posts  and  by  reason  thereof  view  him  as  an
    individual that had converted or had  renounced  Islam  and  would  the
    appellant in those circumstances be at risk.

15. It does not appear that Judge Davies has dealt with that potential risk
    on return. In that respect Judge Davies has  failed  to  make  material
    findings on the risk on return. However that does not impact  upon  the
    rest of  the  determination.  It  is  a  separate  issue  that  can  be
    considered as a discrete issue. It is merely a matter for Judge  Davies
    to make further findings of fact in accordance  with  case  law  cited,
    that is FSH and HB.

16. The judge would have to make findings as to whether or not the Facebook
    posts would have come to  the  attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities
    including at the point of return; what the consequence  of  such  would
    be; whether the post could be  deleted;  and  if  the  posts  could  be
    deleted what would be the reaction of the Iranian authorities.

17. It appears to me that the appropriate  step  is  to  direct  that  this
    matter be remitted back to Judge Davies for Judge  Davies  to  complete
    the judgement in accordance with the case law referred to. The issue is
    whether or not the appellant by reason of his Facebook  page  would  be
    viewed by potential persecutors as a person that has rejected Islam and
    viewed by them as a convert even though the appellant has not genuinely
    converted. Further whether the posts  are  a  true  reflection  of  his
    opinion or not is not  the  issue  but  whether  given  the  posts  the
    appellant would be at risk from the authorities in Iran  by  reason  of
    their perception of his conduct.

18.  For the reasons set out I find that there is a material error  of  law
    and that the appropriate course is for this appeal to be  remitted  for
    Judge Davies to make findings as  to  whether  if  the  appellant  were
    returned to Iran  on  return  he  would  be  at  risk  because  of  the
    authorities' perception of the appellant given his Facebook posts.

19. On that basis the appropriate course is for the  case  to  be  remitted
    back to the First-tier for Judge Davies to determine the issues set out

    Notice of Decision

20. I allow the appeal to the extent indicated and remit the appeal to  the
    First-tier for Judge Davies to determine the issues identified.



Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 22nd May 2019



