
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/13481/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 September 2018                     |On 01 October 2018                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                   mrS S K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Brakaj, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnyz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan who  made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was refused and she appealed and following
    a hearing, and in a decision promulgated 26 April 2018, her appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Traynor.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  as  a  student  in  2012  and
    secured an extension of her leave to remain until 2016. Her husband and
    children had joined her in the United Kingdom  during  that  residence.
    Her husband became ill and was hospitalised in 2017, during which  time
    the Appellant contacted  the  police  as  she  had  been  subjected  to
    domestic violence. The police  assisted  the  Appellant  to  leave  the
    family home and she was accommodated in a women's refuge along with her
    children.  Her  husband  then   returned   to   Pakistan   in   unclear
    circumstances. The Appellant then made an application for international
    protection.

 3. The Respondent took no issue with  her  credibility  and  accepted  the
    domestic violence suffered, the threats made to her by her husband, and
    also that she had a subjective and genuine fear of return to  Pakistan.
    However, the Respondent considered she could  internally  relocate  and
    access a sufficiency of protection. The Respondent did not accept  that
    Appellants husband's uncle who is an MP in Pakistan,  and  influential,
    would have the  power  to  influence  in  Pakistan  to  facilitate  the
    Appellant being located by her husband.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-Tier Tribunal Chamberlain on 17 May 2018. Her reasons for  so
    doing were: -

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
         Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor who,  in  a  Decision
         and Reasons promulgated on 26 April 2018, dismissed the Appellant's
         appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  a  grant  of
         asylum.

         2.    The  grounds  assert  that  the  Judge  erred   in   reaching
         inconsistent conclusions as to the credibility  of  threats,  which
         had been accepted by the Respondent. Further, the  Judge  erred  in
         his approach to the country guidance, SM (Lone women  -  ostracism)
         CG [2016] UKUT 67 (IAC). He further  erred  in  the  assessment  of
         whether there was sufficiency of protection.

         3.   I have carefully considered the decision. At  [33]  the  Judge
         states that the Respondent accepted that  the  Appellant  had  been
         threatened. However he finds that there is no evidence, other  than
         what she informed me orally at the hearing, that her husband or his
         family have made any threats towards her" [47]. This  was  not  the
         first time she had said she had been threatened, and  I  find  that
         this is an arguable error of law, especially given the Respondent's
         acceptance of the threats. Given the relevance of  threats  to  the
         risk on return, I find that it is material. In relation to  SM,  it
         is arguable that the Judge failed to look at the wider factors  set
         out there [49]. Although the guidance in KA is referred to [47], it
         is also arguable that there has been insufficient consideration  of
         the attitude of the police to cases involving domestic violence.

         4.   The grounds of appeal are arguable  and  merit  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal."

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 6. Mrs Brakaj, in making her submissions,  expanded  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal with particular  reference  to  the  first  ground
    where  it  is  submitted  that  the  Judge  has  come  to  inconsistent
    conclusions as to the credibility of the threats made to the  Appellant
    and that Judge Traynor's  findings  in  this  regard  are  consequently
    unsafe. At paragraph 47 of his decision the Judge states "there  is  no
    evidence, other than what she informed me orally at the  hearing,  that
    her husband or his family have made any threats towards her.  Moreover,
    there is nothing to suggest that her parents have reported such threats
    to the police in order that they can protect  themselves  from  alleged
    repercussions arising from her separation.". The Judge has erred in not
    directing himself  appropriately  or  at  all  as  to  the  Appellant's
    evidence given in her interview and has further erred at  paragraph  42
    of the decision by stating that the only  evidence  of  threats  arises
    from the Appellant's contention that there was a telephone  call.  This
    is inaccurate and does not reflect the  Respondent's  own  position  as
    detailed at paragraphs 39 onward of the  refusal  letter  where  it  is
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  threatened  and   that   she   has
    demonstrated a genuine subjective  fear  on  return  to  Pakistan.  Mrs
    Brakaj argued that this error and its consequent finding has  played  a
    central part in the Judge's decision making resulting in him coming  to
    the conclusion that he did. She also submitted that the Judge had erred
    in his  overall  credibility  assessment  and  had  effectively  sought
    corroboration when none was required.

 7. Mr Diwnyz was unable to resist these arguments which in any event,  had
    not been the subject of a Rule 24 reply.

 8. I shared Mrs Brakaj's analysis. The Judge has materially  erred  within
    his credibility assessment and has failed to recognise the Respondent's
    own position as detailed within the refusal letter.

 9. Given this material error both parties invited me to remit this  appeal
    to the First-Tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing. Plainly there has  to
    be fresh findings made and accordingly it is the  course  I  intend  to
    adopt.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Traynor.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 24 September 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

