

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/13949/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2018                              |On 4 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  ms c a G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The subject of challenge in  this  appeal  is  the  decision  of  Judge
    Hudson of the First-tier Tribunal sent on 24 May  2017  dismissing  the
    appeals of the appellant's mother and son, both  citizens  of  Nigeria,
    against the decision made by the respondent on 2 December 2016 refusing
    their protection claims.

2.   Since in the  course  of  submissions  there  was  considerable  common
    ground between the parties as to multiple  problems  with  the  judge's
    decision, I can be very brief.

3.   The judge's decision is vitiated by legal errors.  Many of the  judge's
    findings in relation to the credibility of the appellants are  cast  in
    highly subjective - and quite unjudicial - language; see e.g. 28.

4.   The judge's treatment of the medical evidence,  especially  as  regards
    the issue of the  causation  of  the  first  appellant's  scarring,  is
    internally inconsistent and does not  reflect  a  proper  treatment  of
    medical reports.

5.   Despite having before her a medical report from a Consultant Child  and
    Adolescent Psychiatrist from Salford CAMHS confirming  a  diagnosis  of
    PTSD and depression, and despite the fact that the second appellant was
    a minor, the judge nowhere considered  treating  him  as  a  vulnerable
    witness pursuant to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note of 2010.

6.   These two features alone render the judge's fact-finding unsafe.

7.   I would observe that  the  above  flaws  in  the  judge's  fact-finding
    impact on all aspects of the appellants' case.  Even if  one  proceeded
    on the basis that the appellants' case were taken at  its  highest,  it
    could not be said  that  the  judge  properly  assessed  the  issue  of
    internal relocation, since the issue  of  the  mental  health  of  both
    appellants would inevitably be relevant to assessing reasonableness  of
    relocation.  The same problem afflicts the judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellants' Article 8 circumstances and  in  particular  the  issue  of
    whether  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  their  re-
    integration.

8.   In the circumstances of this case, none  of  the  judge's  findings  of
    fact can be preserved and the case needs to be remitted to the FtT.

9.   Like UTJ Perkins, I am not at all sure  that  the  appellants  will  be
    able to succeed in their appeals at the next hearing.  The ex-husband's
    role in  facilitating  the  children's  reunification  with  the  first
    appellant in the UK is not indicative of this man posing  a  continuing
    threat and in any event, as regards internal relocation, I find it hard
    to see how the appellants could show this would entail for them a  lack
    of safety.  However, that still leaves the "reasonableness" limb of the
    internal relocation issue as well as the Article 8 claim.

10.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Hudson).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 20 March 2018
               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


