
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13813/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 27 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     jG
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1 January  1998.   He
    appeals with the permission  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Appleyard
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh  promulgated
    on 30 September 2019 dismissing his appeal against a  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse  his  fresh  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection dated 9 November 2018.



Factual Background

 2. The appellant arrived  as  an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child  in
    November 2013.  His claim for asylum was refused.  He  did  not  appeal
    against that refusal.  The respondent granted him  discretionary  leave
    as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child, valid until 1 July 2015.  The
    basis of his claim for asylum was twofold: first, on the basis  of  his
    imputed political opinion in relation to his and his family's perceived
    association  with  the  international  military  forces  operating   in
    Afghanistan; and  secondly,  on  the  basis  of  his  membership  of  a
    particular social group as a young male of fighting age.

 3. On 26 October 2015, the appellant was convicted of a  single  count  of
    robbery at the Youth Court,  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  twelve
    months' detention.  That led to the respondent engaging with him  on  a
    number of occasions, culminating in the  appellant  submitting  further
    submissions to the Secretary of State which, following judicial  review
    proceedings, were eventually treated as a fresh claim for the  purposes
    of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  That  refusal  generated  a
    right of appeal which led to the proceedings before the judge below.

Permission to appeal

 4. There are ten grounds of appeal.  It is not necessary for me to  detail
    them all as Mr Tarlow realistically  accepted  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing before me that he did not resist this appeal.  I will outline a
    selection of the grounds upon which the appellant obtained permission.

 5. The appellant contended that the judge failed adequately to consider or
    make sufficient findings in relation to  a  series  of  expert  reports
    which were before the judge. The judge had the benefit of  two  medical
    reports: a medico-legal report prepared by Dr Wootton,  diagnosing  the
    appellant with complex post-traumatic stress disorder,  a  moderate  or
    severe  depressive  disorder  and  a  generalised   anxiety   disorder.
    Secondly, she had a scarring report prepared by Dr Shortt, which  found
    that some of the marks on the appellant's body were "highly consistent"
    with his reported history of torture.  One aspect  of  the  appellant's
    case was that he had been detained and tortured, albeit briefly, by the
    Taliban in Afghanistan before his departure.  Other injuries were  said
    and accepted by the appellant to have been  caused  by  self-harm,  and
    were recorded as such by Dr Shortt.

 6. The judge also had an expert report from a Dr Majidi.  Dr Majidi  is  a
    country expert in Afghanistan.  Her report considered  the  appellant's
    account to be plausible, concluding that he would be likely to  face  a
    risk on return.

 7. The appellant also submitted two document verification reports provided
    by an expert in Afghan culture and expert in document analysis.  It  is
    said that the judge failed to have proper regard  to  the  contents  of
    those reports.



Discussion

 8. At the outset of my analysis,  it  is  necessary  to  recall  that  the
    question of weight is a matter for the judge below.  It is not the role
    of this Tribunal to substitute its own analysis simply because  it  may
    or may not  have  come  to  a  different  conclusion  or  have  adopted
    different reasons.  It is only possible to appeal to this  Tribunal  on
    the basis of a point of law.  As such, grounds of appeal such as  those
    advanced in this case relating to the judge's treatment of  matters  of
    fact that were before her may only be made out if  it  is  possible  to
    demonstrate that the judge's treatment of the  reports  and  the  other
    factual matters was irrational or featured some  other  form  of  legal
    error.

 9. However, I find that the judge's decision involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law, for the following reasons.

10. There was extensive medical evidence before the judge pertaining to the
    appellant's mental health and the past mistreatment that he  claims  to
    have experienced in Afghanistan. Dr Wootton's  report  noted  that  the
    appellant's conditions would be likely to impede his ability coherently
    to recall and recount information, and that he would be  likely  to  be
    able to provide in evidence only "over  general  accounts,  lacking  in
    detail and consistency".  She also noted that the post-traumatic stress
    disorder exhibited by the appellant was born from "sustained,  repeated
    or multiple forms of traumatic exposure and  [this]  reflects  loss  of
    emotional, psychological  and  social  resources  under  conditions  of
    prolonged adversity".

11. The judge made a passing reference to the  medical  conditions  of  the
    appellant at [11], in the context of directing  herself  that  she  was
    satisfied that the appellant was fit  and  able  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing.  She did not address in detail, or at all, the impact that the
    appellant's medical conditions would have had on his ability to  recall
    matters before the Tribunal.  At  [51],  before  having  addressed  the
    import of the medical evidence in her  operative  analysis,  the  judge
    outlined what she considered to be his incredible  evidence  at  times,
    and his general inconsistency.  That  was  a  concern  that  the  judge
    outlined, and a finding that the judge reached, before  she  considered
    the  evidence  of  the  medical  experts  provided  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

12. When the judge purported to consider the import of  the  report  of  Dr
    Wootton at [55],  she  gave  no  reasons  for  dismissing  the  matters
    contained in the report as being a possible explanation  for  what  she
    considered to be the lack of credibility and the inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's claim.  She said:

         "Whilst  I  note  the  findings  of  Dr  Wootton,  this  does   not
         sufficiently explain the inconsistency of the appellant's claim."

    It is not possible to know from that paragraph why  the  report  of  Dr
    Wootton does not "sufficiently  explain"  the  difficulties  the  judge
    found to exist in the appellant's claim.

13. I consider this to be an error of law for two reasons: first, that  the
    judge fell into the now well-established trap set out in  the  case  of
    Mibanga v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367.  The judge failed to have regard to the evidence in the  round
    and simply included her analysis of the medical evidence to  adopt  the
    terminology  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  "bolt  on"   following   her
    substantive analysis already conducted.

14. Secondly, the analysis that the judge purported to conduct in  relation
    to the contents of the medical reports, in particular the report of  Dr
    Wootton, was simply no analysis at all.  The judge merely  stated  that
    she was not satisfied that the "inconsistency" of the appellant's claim
    had been satisfactorily explained but gave no reasons for that finding.



15. At no point in her decision did the judge consider the  impact  of  the
    appellant's general vulnerability on the lack of ability that he  would
    have to give evidence in support of his claim.  At [59] the judge  held
    against the appellant what she considered to be the late disclosure  of
    the account that he had provided of being tortured.  She said this:

         "This disclosure occurred four  years  after  his  arrival  in  the
         United Kingdom and had not been referred  to  previously.   In  the
         circumstances I find the basis of the appellant's asylum  claim  to
         be inconsistent, with an inconsistent reliance on varied  forms  of
         evidence to support a particular aspect of the claim."

16. The judge did not consider, for example, the  possible  impact  of  the
    appellant's medical conditions on his late disclosure  of  the  torture
    narrative.  This was  despite  the  report  of  Dr  Wootton  noting  at
    [14(a)(ii)] that  the  appellant  demonstrates  or  exhibits  avoidance
    symptoms.  Generally, Dr Wootton found that the  experiences  that  the
    appellant would have  endured  as  a  young  child  of  a  considerable
    vulnerability would render him reluctant to address  those  experiences
    during subsequent interactions with the respondent.

17. At [33] the judge appeared to have accepted the respondent's  incorrect
    analysis of Dr Shortt's report.  She appeared to  criticise  Dr  Shortt
    for having based the analysis in the report merely on  ten  photographs
    rather than an examination of the appellant in person.  As Dr  Shortt's
    report demonstrates, a full consultation took place with the  appellant
    and a personal examination  was  conducted.   It  is  not  possible  to
    sustain the respondent's criticism of the Shortt report on that  basis,
    yet that is what the judge appears to have done.

18. In the circumstances, in light of this analysis I consider the entirety
    of the judge's credibility analysis to have been  flawed.   It  is  not
    possible for particular aspects of it to be isolated  in  order  to  be
    preserved.  The consequences of this analysis are that I must find that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and that that error of law was such that the  decision  must  be
    set aside in its entirety.  The appropriate remedy  is  for  an  entire
    rehearing of the appellant's case  to  take  place  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

19. I maintain the anonymity order made by Judge McIntosh.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge McIntosh involved the making of an error  of  law  and
is set aside.

I remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  by  any  judge
other than Judge McIntosh.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 21 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
