
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13309/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|on 26 October 2018                 |on 27 November 2018                     |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum
               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HGN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal brought on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.   For  the
first part of this decision, we refer to the Home Office/Secretary of  State
as 'the appellant', and the appellant at first instance as 'the  respondent'
to this appeal.

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge Juss of the  First-
        tier Tribunal ('the  judge'),  promulgated  on  22  February  2018,
        allowing the respondent's appeal against the appellant's  decision,
        dated 27 November 2018, that had refused his  asylum,  humanitarian
        protection and human rights claims.


     2. In short, this onwards appeal  advances  on  the  following  basis:
        namely, that the  judge  made  a  material  error  of  law  in  his
        determination by allowing the  respondent's  appeal  on  Article  8
        grounds (outside of the Immigration Rules)  on  the  basis  of  the
        existence of exceptional circumstances.

     3.  The  appellant  maintains  that  this  amounted  to   a   material
        misdirection in law on rationality grounds because the judge failed
        to give adequate reasons for his  findings,  including  failing  to
        consider any adverse  features,  as  part  of  the  proportionality
        assessment, particularly given that the  respondent  was  a  failed
        asylum seeker. This the appellant maintains  renders  the  decision
        both unfair and unsafe.

     4. On 14 March 2018, Judge  Grant  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave
        permission to appeal on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the
        judge  had  given  inadequate  and  misconceived  reasons  for  his
        findings and had misapplied higher authority case law.

     5. On 10 April 2018, Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson  gave  directions  in
        relation to the listing of this matter, including a  timetable  for
        the service of evidence.

     6. It is against the above  background  that  this  matter  is  listed
        before us today.



   Background


     7. The central facts in this matter are as follows: the respondent  is
        a national of Vietnam, born in 1999. He maintains that  he  arrived
        in the UK clandestinely on 10 June 2015 'to  have  a  better  life'
        (Q1.19). He claimed asylum on 14 July 2015.


     8. The judge at first instance made various findings of  fact  in  his
        determination, including  that  the  respondent  claimed  that  his
        mother had left Vietnam in 2009 to work in Russia and that  he  had
        lost contact with her. On the respondent's account,  he  had  lived
        with his grandmother in Vietnam until she passed away in  2014.  He
        maintained that he did not have any other relatives in Vietnam.  He
        arranged for a man to help him travel to Russia, so that  he  could
        look for his mother there. He initially found work, before  meeting
        another individual who said he could arrange for an  agent  to  get
        him to the United Kingdom. His purported fear was that upon  return
        to Vietnam he would have to repay the people from whom he  borrowed
        money to travel to Russia in the first place.

     9. The respondent further maintained that he would  be  mistreated  on
        account of his membership of a particular social group, namely that
        he was an orphan and a victim of  modern  slavery.  His  claim  for
        humanitarian protection was based upon a fear that if  he  returned
        he was  at  risk  of  unlawful  killing,  torture  or  inhuman  and
        degrading treatment.

    10. We remind ourselves  that  the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
        respondent's asylum and  humanitarian  protection  claims  are  not
        before us today. His findings in that regard are categoric and  are
        not disputed, and we can find no proper reason  to  interfere  with
        them as a  result.  That  element  of  the  judge's  decision  must
        therefore stand.

    11. Further, we concur with the  judge's  conclusion  that  because  he
        found that the respondent had not established a  well-founded  fear
        of persecution, the judge was entitled to find on the facts of  the
        instant case that the claim did not engage Article 3 of  the  Human
        Rights Convention. Again, that finding  has  not  been  subject  to
        challenge before us, and we do not propose to reopen it. There  are
        no proper grounds to do so.


This appeal and the law

    12. The nub of the appeal revolves around Article 8 of the Human Rights
        Convention, and the respondent's right to a private life.

    13. The appellant submits that the judge has not fairly considered  the
        public interest considerations set out in section 117A and B of the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In particular, it  is
        suggested that the fluency or otherwise of the respondent's English
        is a moot point, and the financial independence of  the  respondent
        has not been  considered  at  all.  The  presenting  officer  today
        submitted that that is relevant to the  Article  8  proportionality
        assessment set out in R (on the application of Agyarko) v Secretary
        of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.

    14.  We  agree.  The       Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko   outlines   the
        requirements for granting leave outside of  the  Immigration  Rules
        where  'exceptional  circumstances'  apply,  in  order  to   ensure
        compatibility with the applicant's right under  Article  8  of  the
        European Convention on Human Rights. In our judgement, the judge at
        first instance  in  his  decision  failed  to  fairly  balance  the
        competing public and individual interests  involved  when  applying
        the proportionality test in Article 8, in particular by failing  to
        properly consider the factors in section 117B. Fairness means  fair
        to both sides. The case of Agyarko involved family  life,  but  the
        same considerations apply, namely that the tribunal should look  at
        the policy considerations first when weighing the competing  issues
        and striking a fair balance.

    15. The public interest considerations set out at section 117B identify
        the matters the tribunal and /or court  at  first  instance  should
        take into account in all cases when considering Article 8.


             117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
             all cases


             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.


             (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-
             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


             (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


             (4) Little weight should be given to-
             (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


             (5) Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.


             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does not require the person's removal
             where-
             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.



    16. Agyarko specifically cites MF (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for
        the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR  544,  which
        suggests "something very compelling which will  be  exceptional  is
        required to outweigh the public interest in removal" (para 42).  It
        is for that reason that appropriate weight should be given  to  the
        public interest considerations set out above.


    17. That sentiment was repeated by the Supreme Court in Agyarko,  which
        stated the critical issue will generally  be  whether,  giving  due
        weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
        person in the case before it, the Article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
        strong to outweigh it (paragraph 57).

    18. It will only be  in  genuinely  exceptional  circumstances,  having
        struck a fair balance between the competing public  and  individual
        interests involved, that refusing an individual leave to remain and
        then removing them from the UK would breach Article 8.  Exceptional
        means circumstances in which refusal would result in  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences for the individual (see GEN 3.1 of Appendix FM),
        and such that refusal of the application would not be proportionate
        (see paragraphs 54 - 60 of Agyarko).


The judge's decision in the instant appeal

    19. We are satisfied that the judge made a material error of law in his
        assessment of the appeal.


    20. At paragraph 18 of his determination the judge  suggests  that  the
        question is whether there are any exceptional circumstances for the
        grant of discretionary leave to remain  and  whether  the  position
        outside of the Immigration Rules would be the same as  the  reasons
        set out in  the  refusal  letter.  In  answering  this,  the  judge
        considers the facts. He states that the respondent arrived  in  the
        UK aged around 16. He had been in the UK for 3 years at the time of
        the hearing, and was at that  time  19  years  of  age.  The  judge
        proceeds to consider whether or not the respondent could  integrate
        into Vietnam and concludes that he could not, because (applying the
        broad evaluative judgement required 'whether [the respondent] had a
        reasonable opportunity of  being  accepted  in  Vietnam'),  he  was
        recognised as an orphan, had no friends or relatives there, no  one
        to help him find a job, and no evidence of  a  home  there,  making
        reintegration into Vietnamese society, a country that  he  left  at
        the age of 14, by implication difficult.

    21. In our considered opinion, it was incumbent on the  judge  to  look
        first at the public interest considerations under Article 8 as part
        of the proportionality exercise and balance those when  considering
        exceptional circumstances. In our finding, the judge failed to take
        properly into account a number of relevant factors  and  failed  to
        direct himself to the relevant requirements  in  section  117B.  In
        particular, we find that he failed to give proper consideration  to
        the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  being  in  the
        public interest; that his assessment of the respondent's ability to
        speak English 'fluently', or  at  any  level,  was  without  proper
        evidential foundation; and the financial independence or  otherwise
        of the respondent was not properly considered.

    22. Viewed in the round, the  judge's  determination  lacks  sufficient
        reasoning and  a  balanced  approach.  A  decision  not  rationally
        reasoned is a decision that the judge is not entitled to reach.


    23. The judge's conclusion that the respondent's case is exceptional in
        the sense that  a  refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
        consequences for the individual,  such  that  the  refusal  of  the
        application would not be proportionate, lacks the proper  and  fair
        balance required, see Agyarko.


    24. We find the judge's explanation for why the consequences of removal
        would be unjustifiably harsh to be thin in  all  the  circumstances
        and insufficiently supported by the evidence he identified. We make
        it clear that this is not just simply a case of the Upper  Tribunal
        taking a different view on the  facts:  the  judge  has  failed  to
        properly consider the case law and the other evidence available.

    25. We therefore set aside the decision in terms of the Article 8 human
        rights claim. It is  therefore  necessary  for  us  to  remake  the
        decision.


Re-decided appeal

For the second part of this decision, we refer to the Home  Office/Secretary
of State as 'the respondent', and the appellant at first  instance  as  'the
appellant'.

    26. In order to redecide the Article 8 aspect of the case, and with the
        consent of the Home Office presenting officer, the  appellant  gave
        further  evidence.  He  also  produced,  in  contravention  to  the
        directions given by Judge Dawson, some  documentary  evidence  from
        Bedford College relating to the qualifications he had obtained  and
        a covering letter that vouched to his reliability and courtesy as a
        student. Again, the Home Office did not object to the admission  of
        these documents and we were satisfied that it was in the  interests
        of justice to admit them, bearing  in  mind  the  appellant  was  a
        litigant in person.

    27. In evidence, the appellant told us that when  his  grandmother  had
        died her home had passed to him. This was  situated  in  a  village
        called Thien Loc. He was unsure if the property still  remained  in
        his name. Part of the deal he struck to travel to Russia, he  said,
        was to hand over the ownership papers ('the  red  book')  for  that
        property to the person arranging his passage.

    28. We were satisfied that he had grown up in this village and that  he
        had worked there for a while. We had reservations about  the  other
        parts of his account because the appellant had provided no depth to
        his evidence. In particular, the appellant had given no  indication
        of the value of the bungalow he inherited, or what  became  of  the
        furniture inside,  of  his  personal  possessions,  and  the  like.
        Further, his initial account was that he had handed  over  the  red
        book as surety for the loan. This did  not  necessarily  mean  that
        ownership of the bungalow had passed, and  the  appellant  provided
        nothing to show that it had. The appellant did not appear  to  have
        taken any steps to investigate this, notwithstanding the fact  that
        he made reference in interview to one of his  neighbours  having  a
        telephone, and him having received money sent back from his  mother
        on previous occasions, suggesting reliable means of  communication.
        Bearing in mind such methods have improved in terms of social media
        and the World Wide Web over time, we were not  persuaded  that  the
        appellant had taken proper steps to  establish  his  case  in  this
        regard. Further, the tribunal found that the appellant  had  failed
        to demonstrate that the people who he suggested he  owed  money  to
        had any ongoing  interest  in  him  or  any  clear  motivation  for
        pursuing him.

    29. The appellant confirmed that  he  went  to  school  in  Thien  Loc,
        including a secondary high school  (Nghi  Hoa),  where  he  studied
        maths, physics and chemistry. That is not disputed,  and  we  found
        accordingly. He also confirmed that he had friends at that  school.
        He said he had lost contact with them, but assumed they were  still
        in the village. He confirmed that they were close  friends  of  his
        and that he had played village football  with  them  on  the  local
        team.

    30. The appellant was also able to confirm that some of  the  villagers
        had helped him out after his grandmother's death. These were people
        who his grandmother and he had known all of  his  life,  albeit  he
        claimed he was not in contact with them at the moment. He  said  he
        had never tried to  contact  them.  The  tribunal  found  that  the
        appellant had showed some resilience in being able to  travel  from
        Vietnam to apparently Moscow, where he had  obtained  a  job  in  a
        sewing machinist factory  cutting  fabric,  and  then  from  Russia
        through a number of countries, before arriving in France, and  then
        onto the UK.

    31. The appellant had initially suggested in interview that  he  wished
        to be a hairdresser, but he had not pursued a  qualification  as  a
        hairdresser in the UK, although his support  worker  had  suggested
        that funding may be available at some point.  He  had  not  thought
        about being a translator or interpreter in Vietnam  and  stated  he
        had never thought about returning to Vietnam or what his life might
        be like there. He said he had met friends in the UK and he saw them
        as his family. The appellant had met a  girlfriend  here;  she  was
        also Vietnamese and was applying for  asylum.  They  did  not  live
        together, and had only been in a  relationship  for  8  months.  He
        lived with 3 other Vietnamese and he received �57 per week. He  had
        some classes during the week and played football with his  friends.
        He had no health  issues  other  than  a  small  problem  with  his
        stomach, having eaten a lot of spicy food.


Article 8/private life and the Immigration Rules

    32.  Paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  identifies   the
        requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
        grounds of private life in the UK. We bear in mind that the  burden
        is on the appellant in this regard.


    33. The appellant is 19 years of age and therefore an adult. He has not
        lived continuously in the UK for at least  20  years.  He  has  not
        spent at least half of his life living continuously in the UK.  The
        other considerations under paragraph 276 ADE  (1)(i)-(iv)  also  do
        not have application.

    34. We therefore considered whether there  were  any  very  significant
        obstacles in  terms  of  the  appellant's  return  to  Vietnam  and
        reintegration under paragraph 276(1) ADE(vi).

    35.  The tribunal found that the  appellant  had  spent  his  formative
        years up to the age of 14 growing up in Vietnam. He had worked at a
        furniture shop close to his home between  February  2014  and  June
        2014; and had had some work experience in Russia. He had had almost
        3 years of education in the UK. Taken together, we found this  gave
        him a number of appropriate life skills. The certificates  that  he
        produced showed that he had various entry  level  certificates  for
        skills for life; including a pass in skills for life  speaking  and
        listening, and a functional skills qualification in mathematics. He
        also had a skills for life certificate  for  writing  and  reading,
        together with further entry-level awards. These  were  all  to  his
        credit. In our finding, they would serve him well upon  his  return
        to Vietnam, where his job prospects, for example with tourism,  may
        be enhanced because of them.

    36. When asked whether there would be any significant obstacles in  his
        view to him returning, he said the biggest obstacle to it was  that
        he had nowhere to go, no home, no family, and a  relationship  here
        and he felt he would lose contact with people.

    37. We disagree. His relationships could be maintained  through  modern
        means of communication  including  the  Internet.  It  was  unclear
        whether he had retained his family home in Vietnam. It was apparent
        through his evidence that he still had school  friends  and  social
        contacts in his village. His wish to continue  his  education  here
        was not a  factor  that  the  tribunal  could  properly  take  into
        account. He  told  the  tribunal  he  had  only  been  romantically
        involved with his girlfriend for 8 months, and we find accordingly.
        His house  mates  appeared  to  be  transient,  and  his  temporary
        membership of a college could not amount to  having  established  a
        private life.

    38. In the tribunal's finding he could establish no right to remain. He
        was not here as a student, so Article 8 could  not  be  established
        via that route. Nor did he have  any  family  members  in  the  UK.
        Article 8 under the Rules was simply not  engaged  because  he  had
        failed to demonstrate a significant private life in the UK.

    39. In our finding, the Article 8 claim under the Rules (para 276  ADE)
        was not made out.


Article 8 - outside of the Immigration Rules

    40. We went  on  to  consider  Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules.  In
        considering the proportionality factors set out  in  section  117B,
        the tribunal was not persuaded about the extent of his  proficiency
        in the English language, although we  accepted  that  he  had  some
        English (his certificates in this regard were basic, and  were  not
        to GCSE level. Further, while the tribunal disregarded  this  as  a
        factor, it is  correct  to  observe  that  the  appellant  used  an
        interpreter throughout the hearing).

    41. There was no evidence of financial independence  and  the  tribunal
        proceeded on the basis that at present he had no right to work.

    42. While the tribunal was conscious that the  appellant  had  been  an
        orphan and maintained  that  he  had  no  family  in  Vietnam,  the
        tribunal had to balance this with the fact that he, in our finding,
        had been able to adapt to life in the UK relatively  easily,  where
        the same considerations could be said to apply.

    43. When the appellant was asked why he could not  return  to  Vietnam,
        the appellant struggled to give an answer, other than  he  had  not
        been there for a long time and he had imagined himself  progressing
        in the United Kingdom.

    44. Maintaining the balance set out in  Agyarko,  we  could  not  find,
        giving due weight to  the  strength  of  the  public  interest  and
        striking a fair balance between the competing public and individual
        interests involved, anything  disproportionate  in  his  return  to
        Vietnam.  The appellant should be able to find a job, make friends,
        and pursue an active life at the age of 19, in a country  where  he
        spoke the language and was familiar  with  the  culture.  This  was
        reinforced by his  witness  statement  and  his  contact  with  the
        Vietnamese community in the UK. Vietnam  has  a  functional  health
        care and education system -  see  paragraph  127  of  the  decision
        letter, which there was no evidence to contradict. We further  note
        that he may benefit from a  resettlement  package/voluntary  return
        service, as set out in the decision letter.

    45. As a result, we found that exceptional circumstances did not apply.



Notice of Decision

The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is  confirmed  in  that   the   asylum,
humanitarian protection and Article 3 decisions stand unchanged.  They  were
not subject to this appeal.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision allowing the  Article  8  appeal  is  set
aside for material error of law. The following decision is substituted.

The Article 8 appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                                                 [pic]
                      Date 15 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
