
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13203/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 March 2019                     |On 29 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    mr MS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bradshaw, Counsel, instructed by SMK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Judgment delivered orally on 15 March 2019

1    This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Graham  dated  19  October
    2018.  The Respondent is a national of  Pakistan.  He  claims  to  have
    entered the UK in 1994 by plane, aged 6,  and  to  have  remained  here
    since that time. In February 2015 he was detained by police and  on  13
    February 2015 he made a protection and human  rights  claim,  asserting
    that he was at risk of serious harm in Pakistan, and that he  had  also
    resided in the United Kingdom for at least 20 years, and  that  he  was
    thus entitled to leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  Appellant  refused  that  application  in  a
    decision dated 30 November 2017.

2    The Respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  matter  came
    before the judge at the Hearing Centre at Priory Court,  Birmingham  on
    21 September 2018. The Respondent gave evidence.

3     In  his  decision  dated  19  October  2018  the  judge  rejected  the
    credibility of the Respondent's claim to fear serious harm in Pakistan,
    and to have lived in the United Kingdom for  at  least  20  years.  The
    judge also considered whether the Respondent's removal would amount  to
    a disproportionate interference with his rights under Article  8  ECHR,
    and found, for reasons given within the body of the decision,  that  it
    would not.

4    However, the notice of decision  given  at  the  end  of  the  decision
    states as follows:

         "I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

         I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

         I allow the appeal on human rights grounds."

5    In an application dated 6 November 2018, the Appellant applied  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    arguing, in summary, that the findings of fact made and  the  reasoning
    set out within the main body of the decision were inconsistent with the
    judge's apparent notice of decision at the end of the decision to  have
    allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.  The Appellant invited  the
    Tribunal to correct this apparent error by invoking  its  powers  under
    Rule 31 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 ('the 2014  Rules')  which  provides  as
    follows:

         "Clerical mistakes and accidental slips or omissions

         31.  The Tribunal may at any time correct any clerical  mistake  or
         other accidental slip or omission in the decision, direction or any
         document produced by it, by-

         (a)  providing notification of the amended decision  or  direction,
             or a copy of the amended document, to all parties; and

         (b)  making any necessary amendment to any information published in
             relation to the decision, direction or document."

6    In a decision dated 26 November 2018, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Keane granted permission to appeal, finding that the ground  of  appeal
    was arguable.  No consideration appears  to  have  been  given  to  the
    Appellant's specific request that the First-tier Tribunal, to whom  the
    application for permission was made, exercise its power under  Rule  31
    as requested.

7    Following that grant of permission to appeal,  the  matter  was  listed
    before the Upper Tribunal with standard directions having  been  issued
    to both parties.  That included a requirement that  the  Respondent  to
    this appeal provide a response to the  Appellant's  notice  of  appeal,
    under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    ('the 2008 Rules'), setting out whether the appeal was resisted and  on
    what grounds.  No such response has been provided to the Tribunal.

8    We have heard from Mr Bates for the Appellant Secretary  of  State  and
    from Mr Bradshaw for the Respondent.  Mr Bradshaw sought to resist  the
    Appellant's appeal on the basis that there was procedural unfairness in
    the judge having purported within the body of the  decision  to  reject
    both the protection and human rights claims, but to have  given  notice
    in the notice of decision at the end of the document  that  the  appeal
    was allowed on human  rights  grounds.  Mr  Bradshaw  referred  to  the
    authority of MM (unfairness; E & R) [2014] UKUT 105; in  particular  to
    paragraph 14 of that decision, that litigants are entitled  to  a  fair
    hearing,  and  to  paragraph  15,  which  contains  a  distillation  of
    principles  found  in  previous  authority   relating   to   procedural
    unfairness:

         "(i)     The defect, or impropriety, must be procedural in  nature.
         Cases of this kind  are  not  concerned  with  the  merits  of  the
         decision under review  or  appeal.  Rather,  the  superior  court's
         enquiry focuses on the process, or procedure, whereby the  impugned
         decision was reached,

         (ii) It is doctrinally incorrect to adopt the two stage process  of
         asking whether there was a procedural irregularity  or  impropriety
         giving rise to unfairness and, if so, whether this had any material
         bearing on the outcome. These are, rather, two elements of a single
         question, namely whether there was procedural unfairness.

         (iii)    Thus, if the reviewing or  appellate  Court  identifies  a
         procedural irregularity or impropriety which, in its view, made  no
         difference to the outcome, the appropriate conclusion is that there
         was no unfairness to the party concerned.

         (iv) The reviewing or appellate Court should  exercise  caution  in
         concluding that the  outcome  would  have  been  the  same  if  the
         diagnosed procedural irregularity or impropriety had not occurred.

9    Mr Bradshaw sought to argue that the result of  the  judge's  decision,
    which contained reasoned findings  within  the  body  of  the  decision
    rejecting the various elements of the Respondent's case, but purporting
    at the end of the decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds,
    was that  the  Respondent  had  been  treated  unfairly.   However,  Mr
    Bradshaw was unable to identify to us any unfairness in the process  or
    procedure adopted in the hearing, or any other form of unfairness which
    was evident from the body of the decision.  We find that the notice  of
    decision is not something which is procedural,  but  rather  represents
    the final and substantive decision taken in respect of the appeal.

10   In reply to a direct question from the Tribunal, Mr  Bradshaw  accepted
    that there was no challenge from the  Respondent  against  any  of  the
    reasoning  or  findings  contained  within  the  body  of  the  judge's
    decision.  In those circumstances we reject the proposition that  there
    was any procedural unfairness in the judge's decision.

11    Following  AS  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 208, it is apparent that the Upper  Tribunal
    has a power under Rule 42 of 2008 Rules to correct any clerical mistake
    or other accidental slip occurring in a notice of decision,  or  indeed
    within the reasons given reasons for its decisions. However, it  is  to
    be noted that the slip contended by the Appellant is not in a  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal. Further,  it  is  implicit  within  the  Court's
    decision  in  AS  (Afghanistan)  (and  thereby  overruling  Katsonga  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ("Slip Rule"; FtT's  general
    powers: Zimbabwe) [2016] UKUT 228 (IAC) on this point) that the  First-
    tier Tribunal would possess a similar power, under Rule 31 of the  2014
    Rules. However, although the Appellant's application for permission  to
    appeal contained  a  request  that  the  Tribunal  (ie  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) exercise its power under Rule 31 of the 2014 Rules, no action
    was taken in relation to that request.

12   The Upper Tribunal has the power to constitute  itself  as  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, as a judge of the Upper  Tribunal  is  by  operation  of
    s.4(1)(c) Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, also  a  judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. It would therefore be within the power of this
    Tribunal to constitute  itself  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  to
    consider the request made by  the  Appellant  to  correct  the  alleged
    accidental slip within the judge's decision under Rule 31 of  the  2014
    Rules.

13   However, we find  that  the  appeal  may  be  disposed  of  in  a  more
    conventional manner, by considering, as the Upper Tribunal, whether the
    judge's decision involved the making of an error of law.

14   We find that the judge's decision did contain an error  of  law.  Where
    the judge enunciated the decision within the notice  of  decision  that
    the appeal was allowed on  human  rights  grounds,  that  decision  was
    directly contrary  to  the  undisputed  content  of  the  body  of  the
    decision. The notice  of  decision  was  therefore  given  without  any
    reasoned basis to support it.

15   We therefore set aside the judge's  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

16   We are  then  tasked  with  remaking  the  decision.   Given  that  the
    Respondent has accepted that there is no error of law found within  any
    of the reasoning or findings contained within the judge's decision,  we
    see no reason to disturb any of it.  The judge's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal on asylum and humanitarian grounds stands unchallenged.

17   Applying the findings and reasoning given by the judge in the  body  of
    the decision,   we dismiss the Respondent applicant's appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

    Decision

    The decision involved the making of a material error law.

    The judge's decision allowing the appeal on human rights grounds is set
    aside.

    We remake the decision, dismissing  the  applicant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The appeal involved a protection claim.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of their family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 11.4.19
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

