
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13577/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House,    |Determination Promulgated       |
|Newport                         |                                |
|On:              17 September   |On:              4 October 2018 |
|2018                            |                                |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     RSA
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr O Manley, Counsel instructed by Crowley & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to protect the  anonymity  of  the
    Appellant who claims asylum. This direction  prohibits  the  disclosure
    directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of
    the Appellant. Any disclosure and breach of this direction  may  amount
    to a contempt of court. This direction shall  remain  in  force  unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.


 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Waygood in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen of
    Iraq, against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  asylum  and
    issue removal directions.

 3. The application under appeal was  refused  on  1  December  2017.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal which came before Judge Waygood on 30  January  2018
    and was dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The application was granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Martins on 21 March 2018 in the following terms

       The grounds assert that, the judge erred, in that he made an adverse
       credibility finding, because of a factual error; that the  basis  of
       the decision that the appellant can safely  return  to  the  IKR  is
       wrong, as is the finding that the appellant would be returned by the
       respondent to the IKR. It is further submitted that the judge failed
       to take account of the relevant guidance in pertinent CG cases.  The
       finding that the appellant could obtain a travel document in the  UK
       is also wrong in the light of case law.




Background


 4. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Iraq born on 25 February 1996. He claims to have arrived  in
    the UK on 1 June 2016 and he claimed  asylum  the  following  day.  The
    basis of his claim was that he feared persecution in  Iraq  because  of
    his imputed political opinion. The Appellant claimed that he  left  his
    home area of Makhmour because ISIS were approaching  and  that,  having
    fled to Manzawa in Erbil  governate  he  left  the  country  altogether
    because ISIS would take people from the area where he was staying.


 5. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had given  a  credible
    account and refused his application. At the appeal  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  counsel  and  gave  oral  evidence  and  submitted   a
    supporting bundle containing 30  pages  including  a  detailed  witness
    statement.


 6. The Judge dismissed the appeal finding that the core  elements  of  the
    Appellant's account were not  credible  and  that  he  would  not  face
    persecution or a risk of serious harm upon his  return.  In  dismissing
    the appeal, the judge accepted (at paragraph 62)  that  the  Appellants
    home area was contested and that it was not reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to return there. The Judge went on to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant could be returned to the IKR and found that it would  not  be
    unduly harsh to expect him to do so.




Submissions


 7. At the hearing before me Mr Manley appeared for the  Appellant  and  Mr
    Howells for the Respondent.


 8. For the Appellant Mr Manley referred to the grounds of appeal and  said
    that the primary ground is  the  first.  The  Judge  makes  an  adverse
    credibility finding (at paragraphs 45 to 47) because at  interview  the
    Appellant said that his family were living at a camp  with  a  specific
    name "Arina camp" whereas in cross examination he claimed not  to  know
    the name of the camp and denied that he named the camp at interview. Mr
    Manley  referred  to  the  statement  from  the  Appellant's  solicitor
    Samantha Heenan submitted  after  the  First-tier  hearing.  Ms  Heenan
    confirms that she listened to  the  audio  record  of  the  Appellant's
    asylum interview and that when asked where his family were he  replied,
    "I don't know exactly where but they told me we are  in  a  camp".  The
    interviewing officer incorrectly wrote "Arina camp" rather than "are in
    a camp". Although the Judge could not have been aware of it at the time
    this was an error of fact which infected the  credibility  finding.  It
    could have been the "nail in the coffin". The third ground  also  shows
    an error of fact. The Judge finds (at paragraph 63 and 65 that  Manzawa
    is part of Erbil governate and therefore within  the  IKR  whereas  the
    Appellant is from Makhmour in the Ninewah governate outside the IKR. In
    fact, Manzawa whilst within the Erbil governate is outside the  IKR  as
    the border stops at Erbil city.


 9. For the Respondent Mr Howells said that the Appellant's representatives
    did not notify the error  in  the  interview  record  until  after  the
    hearing. This was not before the First-tier Judge.  This  was  not  the
    only credibility point. It is accepted that this was an error of  fact,
    but it was not known at the time. It is also accepted  that  the  Judge
    was wrong is finding that Manzawa was within the IKR.


10. I reserved my decision.




Decision


11. This is a very detailed decision by an experienced First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal  has  been  considered  very
    carefully indeed. The Judge makes  well-reasoned  credibility  findings
    from paragraph 43 to paragraph 50. In doing so the Judge finds a number
    of  reasons  for  doubting  the  Appellant's  overall  credibility.   A
    significant aspect  of  the  credibility  findings  and  later  of  the
    reasonableness of relocation relates to the  Appellant's  contact  with
    his family and knowledge of their whereabouts. At paragraphs 45  to  47
    the Judge notes that whereas the Appellant said in oral  evidence  that
    he did not know where his family had moved other than that it was to  a
    camp  he  was  clearly  recorded  as  giving  a  specific  location  at
    interview. The interview record showed that he claimed his family  were
    living in "Arina Camp".


12. The hearing took place on  30  January  2018.  After  the  hearing  the
    Appellant's solicitors submitted a statement from Samantha Heenan dated
    8 March 2018. Ms Heenan says that she listened to the interview  record
    with an interpreter. The Appellant when asked about his family  stated,
    "I don't know exactly where but they told me we are  in  a  camp".  The
    interviewing officer incorrectly wrote "I don't know exactly where  but
    they told me the Arina camp".


13. This evidence was not before the Judge so he cannot  be  criticised  in
    any way but there is a clear  mistake  of  fact.  Mr  Howells  did  not
    suggest that the statement from Ms Heenan was inaccurate in any way  or
    that there was such a place as "Arina Camp". It is a  mistake  that  is
    very easy to understand after all "are in a camp" and "Arina Camp"  are
    phonetically identical. Whereas this is an error of fact which came  to
    light after the hearing it relates to a matter that was in existence at
    the time of the hearing. Mr Howells rightly points out  that  this  was
    not  the  only  matter  that  caused  the  Judge  to  make  an  adverse
    credibility finding but it is clear from reading the decision  that  it
    was a very significant aspect. In my judgement this mistake of fact was
    material to the Judge's adverse credibility finding. It is  a  material
    error of law.


14.  Having  found  a  material  error  in  this  respect  concerning   the
    credibility findings I can deal briefly  with  the  other  main  ground
    being the location of Manzawa. The Judge deals with internal relocation
    finding that although the Appellant's home is in Makhmour in Ninewah, a
    contested area, he can relocate to the  IKR  in  part  because  he  had
    already moved with his family to  Manzawa  which  being  in  the  Erbil
    governate is in the IKR. This is wrong, and Mr  Howells  accepted  that
    this was wrong. Manzawa is  in  the  former  Erbil  governate  but  the
    boundary of the IKR is on the edge of  Erbil  city  and  Manzawa  falls
    outside the IKR. In my judgement this error of fact makes the  internal
    relocation decision unsafe.


15. My conclusion is that this decision contains  material  errors  of  law
    regarding credibility and internal relocation and as a result  I  allow
    the Appellant's appeal and I  remit  the  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. As the principle error relates to credibility no findings are
    preserved.




  Summary

16. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I allow the appeal and remit to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade with no findings preserved.










Signed:                                 Date: 27 September 2018

[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
