
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13318/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th November 2018                         |On 27th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     G H
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Durance, promulgated on 9th February 2018, following a hearing at
    Manchester on 25th  January  2018.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and  he  was  born  on  1st
    March 1989.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    30th November  2017,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he has a fear of ISIS  due
    to having been present in Makhmur, while they attacked the town, and in
    his claim he provides an account demonstrating that  he  had  not  been
    targeted personally or directly.  He also claims that despite  ISIS  no
    longer being present in the territory he will  be  killed  by  Hasd-al-
    Shabi forces.  He also fears mistreatment or death at the hands of  his
    wife's ex-husband due to having got married to his wife.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant's account.  He gave
    reasons for doing so (at  paragraphs  49  to  65)  and  concluded  that
    internal relocation was available to the Appellant in Iraq were  he  to
    return, and that the CSID card would be possible  for  him  to  procure
    again because he previously had such a card (paragraph 69).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  had  wrongly  either
    disbelieved the Appellant in terms of the account that he gave, or  had
    made findings of fact, in relation to matters that were deemed  by  him
    to have been in issue, without these matters ever being  expressly  put
    to the Appellant for his explanation with regards to them.   Particular
    attention was drawn to how the judge  had  made  findings  of  fact  at
    paragraphs 49 to 55.

 6. On 31st July 2018  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that unless a point of contention was so  obvious
    that it should have been addressed by an Appellant, without warning, it
    was arguable that judges should not make findings, on points  that  are
    not put to the Appellant.  Moreover, in granting permission, the  Upper
    Tribunal also stated that the use of the phrase by the judge  that,  "I
    find on the lower standard  of  proof  that  the  Appellant  has  given
    discrepant information" (at paragraph 52) was unclear as to the precise
    standard of proof that was applied by the judge.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 13th November 2018, Mr Karnik, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that there were three issues  before
    this Tribunal.  First,  there  was  a  procedural  unfairness  in  that
    conclusions were reached in  relation  to  particular  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's appeal without the issues being  specifically  put  by  the
    judge to the Appellant, before it was concluded that the Appellant  had
    given discrepant answers.  Second, there was a  failure  to  take  into
    account material matters.  Third, there was  an  improper  use  of  the
    standard of proof.

 8. In making good his submissions before me, Mr Karnik submitted  that  he
    could do no better than go to particular aspects of the  appeal,  which
    were pivotal to the Appellant's claim.  First, the judge considered  an
    issue as to whether the Appellant had been assaulted by  ISIS  and  had
    then fled, or whether he had been involved in fighting or subjected  to
    gunfire/shelling or explosives (paragraph  49).   The  judge  explained
    that the evidence from the GP in the notes there was that the Appellant
    was involved in the war in Kurdistan which had led to his being exposed
    to explosions.  There was, however, an  inconsistency  as  to  why  the
    Appellant had been forced to flee Iraq, and this was "pivotal in  terms
    of the events which caused him to  flee"  (paragraph  50).   Mr  Karnik
    submitted that if this was in issue then it ought to have been  put  to
    the Appellant.  It need not have been  in  issue  because  both  things
    could have happened.  The Appellant could have been assaulted  by  ISIS
    but at the same time in a separate event altogether, he could have been
    involved in the war in Kurdistan that  led  to  his  being  exposed  to
    explosions.  To conclude on this basis  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    discrepant in terms that was "pivotal", without this issue being put to
    the Appellant, was a procedural error.

 9. Second, he submitted that if one  looks  at  the  Supplementary  Bundle
    (bundle C) it is clear from the medical evidence of the doctor's  notes
    that there is nothing here which is inconsistent with  the  Appellant's
    own explanation.  In point of  fact,  the  Appellant  was  never  asked
    during his asylum interview about any explosion.  It was therefore, all
    the more important, that if this issue was of concern to the judge,  it
    ought to have been put to the Appellant in the hearing.

10. Third, he submitted that there was the question of the video  evidence.
    This was even more interesting.  There was actually no "video evidence"
    at all provided on the Appellant's behalf.  There had, however, been  a
    reference in the medical notes to there  having  been  video  evidence.
    Accordingly, if the judge wished to see this,  the  question  ought  to
    have been put to the Appellant.  It was not.  And yet, the judge states
    (at paragraph 55) that there was "footage of his  cousin's  funeral  on
    his phone".

11. The judge considered two possibilities as to  how  this  footage  could
    have arisen.  First, he said that "it was either taken on his phone  or
    sent him on his phone".  Second, the judge concluded  from  this  that,
    "either way, this evidence does not support his assertion  that  he  is
    unable to contact family members" (paragraph 55).

12. Mr Karnik submitted that there were two issues here that had been taken
    against the Appellant.   First,  the  question  of  video  footage  and
    secondly, doubt being cast on his evidence that he was not  in  contact
    with his family members.  The reality was, however, that the  Appellant
    had acquired the video footage from members of the Kurdish community in
    the UK (see paragraph 12 of the Grounds of Appeal before the First-tier
    Tribunal).  This issue, if it was to be given a  heightened  importance
    by the judge, ought to have been put to the  Appellant.   It  was  not.
    Accordingly, a series of  conclusions  had  been  reached  against  the
    Appellant, where he had not  been  given  the  opportunity  to  address
    matters of concern arising in the judge's mind.

13. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that there is no doubt that the  judge
    does state (at paragraph 55)  that  there  were  discrepancies  in  the
    Appellant's evidence, when referring to evidence from the Secretary  of
    State and comparing this with what was said by the GP, but there is  no
    explanation either  way,  raised  in  relation  to  how  the  issue  of
    explosions impacted upon the Appellant's claim.   The  judge  may  well
    have been entitled to conclude as he did, but he had to accept that the
    issue had to be put to the  Appellant.   Having  said  that,  Mr  Bates
    submitted that ultimately it was up to the Appellant to make  good  his
    case.  If an issue had arisen in relation to "video footage"  that  had
    been referred to in the GP's notes, then it was for  the  Appellant  to
    ensure that such evidence was put in his bundles of evidence,  so  that
    it could be taken into account by the judge.  In this respect there was
    no error of law.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I set aside the decision and re-make the decision.   My
    reasons are that the judge has concluded that  there  is  no  plausible
    explanation in relation to pivotal matters from paragraph  49  onwards,
    and yet these matters were not put to the Appellant.  This is true both
    in relation to the "video footage", as well  as  the  question  of  the
    explosions impacting upon the Appellant and his beatings by ISIS,  both
    of which, in  themselves  would  not  have  been  necessarily  mutually
    exclusive in terms of leading to the Appellant having to flee Iraq, but
    were deemed by the judge to have been entirely of consequence,  insofar
    as the veracity of the Appellant's claim was concerned.   If  that  was
    so, the issue should have been put to the Appellant.  As  a  matter  of
    procedural fairness, there is accordingly  an  error  of  law  in  this
    respect.

15. There has been a delay in sending out this Determination to the parties
    concerned, because although it was dictated on the day of the Hearing,
    and typed up shortly thereafter, it appears to have been held up in the
    system, before promulgation.

Notice of Decision

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision  of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge Durance, pursuant
    to Practice Statement 7.2(a) of the Practice Directions.

17. An anonymity direction is made.

18. This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th February 2019






