
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13806/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd May 2019                               |On 17th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                 mr m a r b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E S King, Counsel instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision by the Secretary of State  made  on  30th
    November 2018 to refuse his application  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Aujla  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 30th January 2019.   The  Appellant
    now appeals to this Tribunal  with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on 5th March 2019.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    13th September 2009 with entry clearance as a Tier 1 (General) Student.
     He applied for further leave to remain in December  2011  and  January
    2012 and his applications were refused.  His application for a judicial
    review was dismissed in March 2013.  He was served  with  documentation
    as an overstayer in February 2013 and July 2013.  In  January  2015  he
    applied for an EEA residence card as an extended family  member  of  an
    EEA national.  That application was refused.  On 9th February  2016  he
    was arrested and detained with a view to removal but was released  from
    detention subject to reporting conditions in March  2016.   He  applied
    for asylum on 1st June 2018.

 3. His asylum application was based on his claim that he  is  at  risk  of
    persecution in Bangladesh on the basis of his sexuality. He claims that
    he realised that he was bisexual when he was 16  years  old.  After  he
    obtained a degree in Bangladesh he came to the UK to study for an  MBA.
    He claims that he married a woman in the UK in December 2014 and  that,
    in December 2016, after his wife discovered that he  was  bisexual  she
    told his family in Bangladesh  and  the  couple  then  separated.   The
    Appellant claims that he would be persecuted in Bangladesh  because  of
    his sexuality.

 4. In the reasons for refusal letter  the  Respondent  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is a national of  Bangladesh  but  rejected  the  Appellant's
    claim to be bisexual on the basis of  inconsistencies  and  a  lack  of
    detail in his account.  The Secretary of State rejected the Appellant's
    claim that he was forced to marry his wife in the UK.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the Appellant's  account,  found
    that it was not credible and dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The Grounds of Appeal put forward two grounds.  It is contended in  the
    first ground that the judge made an error in considering  the  evidence
    from two witnesses.  The second ground contends that the judge erred in
    concluding that, even if the Appellant were bisexual, he would live his
    life discreetly after returning to Bangladesh [52].

 7. At the hearing Ms King submitted that the judge made a  material  error
    in his treatment of the evidence from the witnesses.  In particular she
    highlighted the judge's conclusions at paragraph 42.  She  pointed  out
    that the two witnesses attended court and gave oral evidence when  they
    expanded upon their witness statements.  It was her submission that the
    judge needed to make clear findings in relation to this evidence but he
    clearly failed to do so.  She submitted that it was not  clear  whether
    the judge had relied on the submission made by the  Presenting  Officer
    in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  two  witnesses  were  "serial
    witnesses" in asylum appeals based on  homosexuality  as  a  reason  to
    reject the evidence of the two witnesses.  If so,  in  her  submission,
    this was not a proper reason on which their evidence could be rejected.
     In her submission, these two witnesses had been granted asylum on  the
    basis of their sexuality and it was not inconceivable that  they  would
    have made friends with gay men in similar situations to themselves.  In
    her view the judge had not made clear why he  gave  no  weight  to  the
    witness evidence.  In her submission it is clear that the judge took as
    a starting point the rejection of the Appellant's account and used that
    to give no weight to the contrary evidence from the two witnesses.

 8. Ms Jones accepted that there was an apparent error in relation  to  how
    the judge dealt with the evidence from the two witnesses.  She accepted
    that the witnesses required consideration, but in  her  submission  any
    error was not material.  In her submission, although the judge referred
    to the witnesses as "serial witnesses", this was not the basis on which
    the evidence was rejected.  She submitted that the  witness  statements
    from the witnesses did not say very much, just that the  witnesses  had
    seen the Appellant in a club.  In her submission the judge started with
    the Appellant's history and took a holistic approach to  the  evidence.
    She submitted that if the decision is read as a whole, it is clear that
    the evidence from the witnesses would not have  made  a  difference  in
    light of the Appellant's oral evidence.  She highlighted  paragraph  43
    where  the  judge  made  his  concerns   known   to   the   Appellant's
    representative at the hearing.

Error of Law

 9. The two witness statements are at pages 54 and 55  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  Both witnesses claim to have known the Appellant since January
    2017 and to have met him in an Asian gay  club.   Each  witness  claims
    that he knows that the Appellant is bisexual.   One  of  the  witnesses
    says that he saw the Appellant engage in intimate behaviour with  other
    males and knew also that he was attracted to females.   Both  witnesses
    indicate that the Appellant has  told  them  about  problems  with  his
    family in Bangladesh.

10. The judge recorded the oral evidence of the two witnesses at paragraphs
    32 and 33 of the decision.  Both said in oral evidence  that  they  had
    seen the Appellant kissing other men in a club.  Each of them said that
    they  had  no  personal  knowledge  about  the   Appellant's   family's
    circumstances and that their knowledge was based on what the  Appellant
    had told them.  Both indicated that they had previously given  evidence
    before the Tribunal; one had given evidence on at least three occasions
    and the other in one other appeal.

11. The judge dealt with the evidence of witnesses at paragraph 42 where he
    said:-

         "Having considered the evidence presented to me and the Appellant's
         account, I have serious concerns about the Appellant's  credibility
         for  the  reasons  I  have  given  below.   As  I  have  found  the
         Appellant's account not credible, I am unable to give any weight on
         the evidence of the two witnesses who incidentally stated that they
         only met the Appellant two years  ago.   They  may  have  seen  the
         Appellant attending gay clubs but it is my conclusion that that was
         part and parcel of the Appellant's elaborate plan  to  fabricate  a
         false asylum claim.  The remainder  of  the  evidence  of  the  two
         witnesses was based on what the Appellant himself  had  told  them,
         for example that his family would kill him if he returned home.   I
         also bear in mind the fact that the two  witnesses  were,  what  Mr
         Reader referred to as, 'serial witnesses' in asylum  appeals  based
         on homosexuality.  One of the two had given evidence  in  at  least
         three previous appeals.  While that in itself was  no  good  reason
         for me to reject their evidence, when I look at the totality of the
         evidence and  bear  in  mind  my  fundamental  concerns  about  the
         Appellant's own credibility, I find that I could place no  evidence
         (sic) weight on their evidence."

12. I accept that it appears in this paragraph that the  judge  decided  to
    not consider the evidence of the two witnesses at all.   However,  when
    the paragraph is read in the context of the rest of the decision it  is
    clear that the judge did in  fact  analyse  the  evidence  of  the  two
    witnesses in that paragraph in the context of the evidence as a  whole.
    The judge said in that he looked at the totality of  the  evidence  and
    then went on to do so from paragraphs 43 to 51.  At  paragraph  43  the
    judge analysed the Appellant's oral  evidence.   The  judge  considered
    that the Appellant was evading answering questions properly,  that  his
    account was  inconsistent  and  without  sufficient  detail,  that  the
    Appellant was vague and evasive when answering questions.  At paragraph
    44 the judge accepted the Appellant had been attending  gay  clubs  for
    two years.   The  judge  considered  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
    marriage at paragraphs 45 and 46 and rejected the  Appellant's  account
    of the background to his marriage finding that  the  Appellant  married
    his wife because he was a heterosexual man who was in love with her and
    not homosexual or bisexual [46].

13. At paragraph 47 the judge rejected the Appellant's explanation for  the
    significant delay in claiming  asylum  having  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    September 2009 when, by his own account, he already knew  that  he  was
    bisexual.  At paragraph 48  the  judge  considered  all  of  the  other
    applications the Appellant had made which  were  rejected.   The  judge
    said that he did not believe that the Appellant would  not  attend  gay
    clubs until two years ago when all of the applications he had made  had
    been refused and he was at risk of removal if he  were  bisexual  [48].
    The judge found that the fact that the Appellant took it  upon  himself
    to attend gay clubs only two years ago when all his  applications  were
    refused seriously undermined the credibility of his claim, and the fact
    that the Appellant started to attend gay clubs two years  ago  when  he
    was at risk of removal was simply motivated by his desire to defeat his
    removal from the UK as an overstayer, not because he was a bisexual  at
    risk on return [48].

14. This finding is key to how the judge considered the evidence  from  the
    two witnesses.  It is clear that the judge accepted that the  Appellant
    attended gay clubs as stated by the two witnesses.  However,  what  the
    judge rejected was any conclusion that his attendance  at  these  clubs
    for a period of two years (after a number of applications for leave  to
    remain had been refused) leant any  credibility  to  his  claim  to  be
    bisexual.  This is the core of the evidence given  by  both  witnesses.
    Anything else  the  witnesses  said  was  simply  recounting  what  the
    Appellant had told them.

15. It is clear from the judge's analysis that he considered  the  evidence
    as a whole, including the evidence from the two witnesses.   The  judge
    accepted that the Appellant had been attending gay clubs  but  did  not
    accept that this led to the conclusion that the Appellant was  bisexual
    as claimed in light of all of the other evidence, including  the  delay
    of nine years in claiming asylum  [49-50],  the  circumstances  of  his
    marriage, the nature of the Appellant's oral evidence  which  concerned
    him to  such  an  extent  that  he  made  his  concerns  known  to  the
    Appellant's representative during his oral  evidence  [43].   In  these
    circumstances I am satisfied that the judge made no material  error  in
    his approach to the evidence of the two witnesses.

16. It was accepted by Ms King that the second ground only bites if  Ground
    1 was established.  In my view if there was any error  in  the  judge's
    assessment as to how  the  Appellant  would  behave  in  Bangladesh  at
    paragraph 52, it is not material in light of my finding that the  judge
    made no material error in his approach  to  the  evidence  of  the  two
    witnesses.

Notice of Decision

17. There is no material error in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 14 May 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date: 14 May 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
