
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/13740/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 17th January 2018                  |            On 12th February 2018     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Wass, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  on  25th
    November 2016 to refuse his application for asylum in the  UK.   First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 3rd July  2017.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Doyle
    on 27th November 2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  claims  to  have
    arrived in the UK on 16th May 2013 and claimed asylum on 17th May 2013,
    he was a minor when he arrived (his  date  of  birth  is  26th  January
    1998). The Appellant's  application  for  asylum  was  refused  on  4th
    December 2013 but he was granted discretionary leave to  remain  as  an
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking child until 22nd July 2015.  The Appellant
    did not appeal against  this  decision  but  made  an  application  for
    further leave to remain on 24th July 2015.  The Appellant  claims  that
    he is at risk on return to Albania  because  he  was  involved  with  a
    criminal gang who used him for criminal purposes.  In the  reasons  for
    refusal letter of 4th December 2013 the  Secretary  of  State  set  out
    reasons why the Appellant's claim to have been involved with a criminal
    gang was not accepted.  In any event the Secretary of State  considered
    that there was  sufficiency  of  protection  from  the  authorities  in
    Albania and that in the  alternative  the  Appellant  could  internally
    relocate within Albania.

 3. In considering the appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out details
    of the Appellant's  claim  and  his  oral  evidence.   The  judge  made
    findings at paragraphs 24-28 of the decision.  The judge found that the
    Appellant's claim was not credible, that there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in Albania and that the Appellant could relocate internally.



Error of law

 4. The Appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and when that application was refused  a  renewed  application
    was made to the Upper Tribunal which was granted.  The grounds are  set
    out  in  the  application  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There   are
    essentially two Grounds of Appeal.  It is contended in the first ground
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in relation to his findings as
    to the Appellant's credibility.  Within this  ground  it  is  contended
    that the judge erred in the findings about the Appellant's claimed gang
    membership and the relationships the gang may have had with the police.
     It is further contended that  the  judge  erred  in  his  decision  in
    relation to the Appellant's claim to have been trafficked.  The  second
    ground contends that there  are  errors  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    findings as to sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

Ground 1

 5. In relation to credibility and in particular  as  to  the  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's claim to  have  been  trafficked,  Ms  Wass
    referred to paragraph 24 of the judge's decision which states:

         "I also find that the appellant's claim that he was trafficked from
         Albania is also dismissed because he has his claims investigated by
         a competent body and it was  concluded  that  his  application  was
         unfounded."

 6. Ms Wass contended that the conclusion by  the  competent  authority  in
    relation to the Appellant was made on the balance of probabilities  and
    that the judge erred therefore in concluding that the  application  was
    unfounded.   She  submitted  that  this  impacted  upon   the   judge's
    consideration of credibility.  At the hearing Ms Wass also referred  to
    the decision in the case of MS (Trafficking - Tribunal's Powers -  Art.
    4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00226 (IAC).  She submitted that this case
    highlights that it is within the Tribunal's  powers  to  make  its  own
    decision as to whether an Appellant is a victim of trafficking and that
    the Tribunal may be better equipped to decide that.   She  pointed  out
    that paragraph 16 of the  judge's  decision  set  out  the  Appellant's
    responses in cross-examination when he discussed the  journey  made  by
    him and his brother to Italy or their journey to the UK.  She submitted
    that this oral  evidence  stands  apart  from  the  assessment  by  the
    competent authority and the judge should have made his  own  assessment
    of this issue.

 7. Mr Melvin submitted  that  the  decision  in  MS  highlights  that  the
    appropriate challenge to a decision by the competent  authority  is  by
    way of judicial review.  The decision by  the  competent  authority  in
    this case was made in December 2013 and the Appellant had chosen not to
    challenge that decision by way of judicial review.  He referred to head
    note (iv) in the decision in MS and emphasised that a Tribunal can make
    their own  decision  as  to  whether  an  Appellant  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking where satisfied that a  negative  trafficking  decision  is
    perverse.  He submitted that this Appellant left  Albania  on  his  own
    passport and the judge fully considered the factual matrix in  relation
    to trafficking and followed the guidance in MS.  He submitted  that  it
    is clear from the decision in MS that  a  Tribunal  would  have  to  be
    satisfied that a trafficking decision is perverse before  reconsidering
    it and in this case the trafficking decision is sustainable.

 8. I have considered the decision in MS and in particular head  note  (iv)
    where the Tribunal said:

         "(iv) Where satisfied  that  a  negative  trafficking  decision  is
         perverse, Tribunals are empowered to make  their  own  decision  on
         whether an Appellant was a victim of trafficking"

 9. It seems to me that Mr Melvin's interpretation is the proper one.   The
    Tribunal in MS emphasised the ability of an Appellant  to  challenge  a
    trafficking decision on the basis that it is not in accordance with the
    law [43].  The Tribunal in MS refers to the prospect of  the  Secretary
    of State failing to apply her own policy or making a perverse  decision
    in relation to the competent authority. In MS the Tribunal referred  to
    the case of  AS  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1469 and highlighted paragraph 18 where  the
    Court of Appeal stated:

         "No doubt, if  a  conclusive  decision  has  been  reached  by  the
         Competent Authority, First Tier Tribunals will be astute not  (save
         perhaps in rare circumstances) to allow an appellant  to  re-run  a
         case already decided against him on the facts. But where, as  here,
         it is arguable that, on the facts found or accepted, the  Competent
         Authority has reached a decision which was not  open  to  it,  that
         argument should be heard and taken into account."

10. In my view, in the instant appeal, the judge was entitled to take  into
    account the decision by the competent authority as he did at  paragraph
    24.  However it is clear that the judge did not consider that  decision
    to be determinative of the issues before him and that  this  was  taken
    into account as  one  matter  in  the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility and the assessment of the Appellant's claim.

11. The second matter raised within the criticism of the judge's assessment
    of credibility is that of the collusion issue.  At paragraphs 20 and 22
    the judge made findings in relation  to  elements  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal.  The judge found that the Appellant's claim to fear a  criminal
    gang and to have been trafficked was not credible.  Among  the  reasons
    put forward by the judge  for  that  decision  is  that  the  Appellant
    claimed that there may be collusion between police and members  of  the
    gang.  The judge found "the Appellant has not provided evidence to show
    that in this instance there was collusion on the part  of  the  police"
    [20].  The judge then referred to objective evidence  and  went  on  to
    conclude that corruption does remain a problem in Albania but that  the
    Appellant had options to seek  redress  which  he  had  not  taken  the
    opportunity to avail himself of.  The judge also found at paragraph  21
    that the police do  not  act  with  impunity  in  relation  to  corrupt
    activities and there are mechanisms to ensure that this does  not  take
    place.  The judge considered that the Appellant did not utilise all  of
    the avenues available to him and that his mistrust of the local  police
    should not have prevented him from going to another police station.

12. It is contended on the Appellant's behalf that the judge failed to take
    into account that the Appellant was a child at the  time  these  events
    occurred and at the time he provided his  substantive  account  in  his
    interview.  It is contended that the requirement placed  by  the  judge
    upon the Appellant to provide evidence of collusion is unreasonable and
    places too high a burden of proof on the Appellant.   It  is  contended
    that the judge's assessment that the Appellant did not avail himself of
    opportunities to raise this  with  police  or  another  police  station
    failed to take account of his age and the fact that he  was  committing
    criminal offences at that time.   Ms  Wass  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to give  any  consideration  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    explained at questions 243-245 of his asylum interview why he  believed
    that there was collusion between the  gang  and  the  police.   In  his
    submission Mr Melvin submitted that the judge  made  adequate  findings
    based on the Appellant's evidence given that the judge made clear  that
    he had not believed the Appellant's evidence.

13. The judge made reference at paragraph 20 to the Appellant's answers  to
    questions 240-245 of the asylum interview.  Therefore it is clear  that
    the judge had these answers in  mind  when  considering  the  issue  of
    collusion.  The judge attached weight to  the  objective  evidence  and
    accepted that corruption does remain a problem but highlighted the fact
    that the Appellant had options within the system to seek  redress  from
    the local police or from police in another area.  Ms  Wass  highlighted
    that the Appellant was a child at this time, he was around 13. However,
    it was the Appellant's claim that he was arrested then (although I note
    that there are significant inconsistencies as to the Appellant's  claim
    as to when he was  arrested  and  for  how  long  he  was  detained  as
    highlighted in paragraph 24 of the reasons for refusal  letter  of  4th
    December 2013).  I note that in the judge's record of  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence, at paragraph 15, the Appellant said that  he  could  not
    remember much about his claimed arrest in February 2013.  In any  event
    it was  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  had  been  arrested.  In  the
    circumstances and on the basis of the evidence I am satisfied  that  it
    was open to the judge,  having  considered  all  of  the  evidence,  to
    conclude that the Appellant had failed to pursue the avenues  available
    to him for protection and  had  failed  to  establish  that  there  was
    collusion in this case.

14. A  further  significant  factor  in  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings is set out at paragraph 22.  There the judge set out that  the
    Appellant's brother (who the Appellant claimed  was  a  member  of  the
    criminal gang who escaped along with him and travelled to the  UK  with
    him) was present at the appeal hearing but did not  provide  a  witness
    statement and did not give oral evidence.  It is clear that  the  judge
    attached significant weight  to  this  factor  in  making  the  adverse
    credibility findings going to the heart of this appeal at paragraph 22.
     Mr Melvin referred to the case of TK (Burundi) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 40 and submitted that  this  is
    evidence that was available to the Appellant and that it  was  open  to
    the judge to make adverse credibility findings based on the failure  of
    the brother to give evidence despite being present in court.   Ms  Wass
    submitted that the lack of corroborative evidence from the  Appellant's
    brother could not impact on the assessment of the issue  of  collusion.
    In any event she submitted that it had been explained to the First-tier
    Tribunal that the reason why the brother did not give  evidence  was  a
    matter of privilege and the privilege was not going  to  be  waived  to
    satisfy the First-tier Tribunal Judge's questions as to why the brother
    was not to give evidence.

15. In my view the issue of privilege does not adequately explain  why  the
    Appellant's brother did not give evidence at the hearing. On the  basis
    of the limited explanation as to why he did not give evidence the judge
    was entitled to take into account the failure by the  brother  to  give
    evidence  as  a  significant  factor  in  assessing   the   Appellant's
    credibility.  This is particularly the case where in  this  Appellant's
    case it is claimed that the brother was part of the Appellant's  entire
    account including his account of events in Albania and his  journey  to
    the UK.

Ground 2

16. It is contended in the second Ground of Appeal that the judge fell into
    error in relation to the assessment of sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation.  Ms Wass pointed out  that  at  paragraph  23  the
    judge concluded that the Appellant could relocate internally in Albania
    and that his fear is localised to where the gang operates and that  the
    gang operates in Tirana, Kosovo and possibly Italy.  Ms Wass  submitted
    that these findings are contradictory in that there is some  degree  of
    acceptance of the extent of the gang's reach.  The acceptance that  the
    gang operates in Tirana, Kosovo and  possibly  Italy  this  involves  a
    cross-border element which contradicts the finding  that  the  gang  is
    localised.

17. In my view the structure  of  paragraphs  20-25  is  somewhat  unclear.
    However, in reading paragraphs 20 to 24 of the decision as a  whole  it
    is clear that the judge made sufficient findings. The  primary  finding
    is that the Appellant's account of his membership of a gang in  Albania
    is not credible  [20-22].  A  factor  of  significant  weight  in  this
    assessment is the failure of the Appellant's brother to  give  evidence
    [22]. Having made that finding it was not necessary for  the  judge  to
    consider sufficiency of protection or internal relocation.  However the
    judge did so in a holistic manner.  It was clear from paragraphs 20 and
    21 that the judge considered (on the basis of the background  evidence)
    that there is a sufficiency of protection for the Appellant in  Albania
    against any claimed threat from a criminal gang.  These  findings  were
    open to the judge on the basis of the evidence.  It is also clear  from
    paragraph 23 that the judge found that (even if  he  were  credible  in
    relation to his claimed fear of the criminal gang) he could  internally
    relocate in Albania.  Whilst it was the Appellant's case that the  gang
    operates  in  Tirana,  Kosovo  and  possibly  Italy  it  was  also  the
    Appellant's case that in terms of Albania itself the gang  operated  in
    the Tirana area  (asylum  interview,  Q84-90)  and  the  Appellant  put
    forward no  evidence  that  the  gang  operated  anywhere  else  within
    Albania.  In these circumstances it was open to the judge  to  conclude
    that the Appellant could, if necessary, relocate within Albania.

18. Looking at the decision as a whole I am satisfied that the  judge  made
    sufficient and adequately-reasoned findings that the Appellant had  not
    established that he was a member of a criminal gang in Albania or  that
    he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  as  a  result  of  his
    involvement with a criminal gang.  The judge found that  in  any  event
    there was a sufficiency of protection for this Appellant in Albania and
    further the judge found that the Appellant could relocate internally in
    Albania.  Looking at the decision as a whole I am  satisfied  that  the
    reasoning is sufficient.

19. In these circumstances I am satisfied  that  the  grounds  disclose  no
    material error of law in the judge's decision.



Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed                              Date: 7th February 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 7th February 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




