
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/13462/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 12th October 2018                          |On 19th October 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  FENG [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision  dated  28  October  2016,  refusing  the
         appellant's claim.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Mozolowski, promulgated  on  21  February
         2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 6 March 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Brunnen, dated 27 March 2018.

 2. Permission was not granted on ground 1, and the appellant did not  seek
    to renew it.

 3. Ground 2 is "errors of law in relation to family planning policy",  (i)
    - (iii).

 4. Sub-paragraph (i) complains that there was  no  finding,  or  no  clear
    finding, on whether the appellant or his wife  would  have  to  undergo
    sterilisation.   Sub-paragraph  (ii)  contends   that   even   if   the
    appellant's wife does not fall within the assessment, the error applies
    in relation to article 8. Sub-paragraph (iii) complains of  lack  of  a
    finding that the appellant could pay a social compensation fee, and the
    consequences for the children.

 5. It does not appear that much was made in the FtT of  risk  of  enforced
    sterilisation.  The matter is not to be found in the grounds of  appeal
    to the FtT or in the appellant's statement of evidence.   There  is  at
    paragraph 15 a record that the family planning  case  was  advanced  in
    part on a risk "that the appellant's partner  would  be  forced  to  be
    sterilised if she were to  fall  pregnant  again".   However,  she  has
    previously failed in an appeal; has no outstanding proceedings or legal
    basis for remaining in the UK; and did not give  evidence,  written  or
    oral.  The appellant provided no information about the extent to  which
    these matters have already been litigated in her name.

 6. The ground founds upon YZ v SSHD [2017] CSIH 41 at paragraph 39.   That
    case was not cited to the FtT.

 7. YZ considered the extent to which the UT was entitled to interfere with
    findings of fact by the FtT.  I do not understand it to be an authority
    on  the  extent  to   which   country   guidance   normally   governing
    consideration of  Chinese  family  planning  policy  issues  is  to  be
    departed from.

 8. Although in a different context, YC [2018] CSOH 40  and  XL  [2018]  58
    tend to confirm that view.

 9. Ground 2 does not show  that  any  error  in  respect  of  the  judge's
    application to the case before  her  of  country  guidance  on  Chinese
    family planning policy.  It is only a vague suggestion that  she  ought
    of her own initiative to have considered some other approach, based  on
    little evidence, no clear submission, and no clear authority.

10. Ground 3, on which Mr Winter concentrated his submissions,  is  "errors
    of law in relation to the  best  interests  of  the  children",  (i)  -
    (viii).

11. It was accepted that (i), which aims at the judge's formulation of  the
    article 8 test, was not by itself of much significance.   The  question
    is not how perfectly the judge formulated  her  self-direction  on  the
    law, but how it was applied.

12. Sub-paragraph (ii) says there was insufficient support for the  judge's
    view that there was no problem in the return of  the  whole  family  to
    China because he would continue to  be  a  protective  factor  for  the
    children, given the acknowledgment at paragraph 54  of  a  professional
    structure of support (in  the  UK)  from  social  workers,  specialised
    nurseries and play groups, and the protection  of  the  Sheriff  Court.
    This overlaps with (iv), where a similar point is made, although I find
    it rather obscure.

13. The underlying contention, as I understood  it  after  submissions,  is
    that the appeal should have succeeded on  the  best  interests  of  the
    children, because concerns over  their  treatment  by  the  appellant's
    partner are met by social work department and court mechanisms  in  the
    UK, but would not be met in the same way in China.

14. Sub-paragraph (iii) complains of lack of  findings  about  whether  the
    appellant's partner has family or accommodation in China.   It  is  not
    said that there was evidence by which findings more favourable  to  the
    appellant's case could or should  have  been  made.   It  was  for  the
    appellant to explain and establish his case, not for the judge to  find
    it for him.

15. Sub-paragraphs (v), (vi) and (vii)  say  that  the  FtT  erred  in  law
    because of insufficient evidence to  show  the  family's  situation  on
    return, social work approval of arrangements for  their  departure,  or
    whether foster care might come into play.

16. Sub-paragraph (viii) says there was no evidence  that  the  appellant's
    wife would consent to his removal of the children from  the  UK.   This
    again blames the  tribunal  for  deficiencies  in  the  case,  in  this
    instance on a point on which the appellant (who lives  with  his  wife)
    should have had no difficulty  in  supplying  the  evidence.   It  also
    appears far-fetched that a  case  might  be  bolstered  by  the  mother
    withholding  consent  to  the  children's   departure   from   the   UK
    jurisdiction, when neither she nor the children have any legal right to
    be here.

17. I find ground 3, as a whole, rather confused.   It  is,  as  Mr  Winter
    submitted, for the SSHD to  show  that  interference  with  family  and
    private life is proportionate.  However, it is for an appellant to  say
    what the interference may be, and to advance the evidence by  which  it
    might be found.

18. As to the complaint of lack of evidence  of  social  work  approval  of
    removal, not only was that another matter for the appellant, but it  is
    well known that the SSHD has elaborate mechanisms  in  place  governing
    removal of families with children.   The appellant did not point to any
    evidence that those mechanisms would not safely govern any  removal  in
    this case.

19. The appellant did not begin to show that protective mechanisms in China
    are less effective than in the UK.  The judge considered  at  paragraph
    60 that "there is a high possibility of there being social  workers  in
    China as well".   The  appellant  does  not  say  that  she  speculated
    wrongly; and again, the onus was on him.


20. The judge took careful note of the evidence before her on these  issues
    and the serious concerns to which it gave rise - see paragraphs 16, 17,
    53, 54 and 61 - 62.  She found nothing to show that the welfare of  the
    children would be compromised by the family's return to  China,  giving
    the appellant a right, derived from their best interests, to remain  in
    the UK.  It has not been shown that the reaching  of  that  conclusion,
    which was rooted in the evidence before the judge, involved the  making
    of any error on a point of law.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

      15 October 2018
      Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




