
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13279/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 15 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                       MR GABRIEL ALBANO GALATEO LORCA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Venezuela. He arrived in this country on
    08 August 2017 and claimed asylum on 19 January 2018. The respondent
    refused his application on 9 November 2018 and the appellant appealed
    on 21 November 2018 under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Foudy and in a
    decision promulgated on 09 May 2019 she dismissed his appeal.
 3. Permission to appeal was given by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Saffer on 17 June 2019 who found it was arguable that the Judge may
    have erred by misapplying the test regarding the availability of
    adequate protection from non-state agents of persecution and whether
    the option of internal flight would be unduly harsh.

 4. No anonymity direction is made.

 5. Neither the appellant nor his representatives attended the hearing  and
    three calls  were  made  to  the  appellant's  representatives  by  the
    Tribunal. The appellant's representative, Sarah, stated  that  she  had
    written to Field House on 6 August  2019  advising  the  appellant  was
    withdrawing his appeal and was seeking a voluntary return to Venezuela.
    A check with Field House revealed  no  such  letter  but  Ms  Pettersen
    confirmed the respondent's system recorded he had applied  on  31  July
    2019 for assisted voluntary return for himself and his family.

 6. I requested the representatives  send  a  copy  of  the  letter  to  Ms
    Pettersen to enable me to deal with the matter under  Rule  17  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 which  states  "a  party
    may give notice of the withdrawal of its case  or  any  art  of  it  by
    sending or delivering  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  a  written  notice  of
    withdrawal". Rule 17(2) goes on to state "Notice of withdrawal will not
    take effect unless the Upper Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except
    in relation to an application for permission to appeal".

 7. The appellant's representatives were given until 12.45 to  provide  the
    letter failing and having waited 45 minutes for the email, I  indicated
    the appeal would be dealt with on the papers in the appellant's absence
    as I did not have the relevant paperwork to deal with the appeal  under
    Rule 17.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8.  The  grounds  argued  that  the  Judge  erred  in  her  assessment  of
    sufficiency of protection for the appellant and  his  family  and  also
    failed to consider internal relocation.

 9. Ms Pettersen opposed the application and submitted this could  only  be
    an appeal under article  3  ECHR  and  the  Judge  had  considered  the
    evidence and concluded there was sufficiency  of  protection  and  gave
    adequate reasons. Having  made  that  finding  there  was  no  need  to
    consider internal relocation.

    FINDINGS

10. The appellant and his family had sought protection and  the  respondent
    refused the application finding no Convention reason and rejecting  the
    claim that there was insufficiency of protection.

11. The Judge listened to the  appellant's  oral  evidence  and  found  the
    account to be credible but she further found that despite  the  country
    conditions there was sufficiency of protection and  the  appellant  and
    his family faced no different difficulties to the rest of the country.

12. Lord Justice Auld in R (Bagdanavicius) [2003] EWCA Civ 1605, summarised
    the position under both Conventions and  said,  amongst  other  things,
    that both sufficiency of state protection, whether from state agents or
    the non-state sector, means a willingness and ability on  the  part  of
    the receiving state to provide through its legal  system  a  reasonable
    level of protection from ill treatment of which the claimant has a well-
    founded fear.  The effectiveness of the system provided is to be judged
    normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent the form of
    persecution of which there is a risk, not just  the  punishment  of  it
    after  the  event.   Notwithstanding  systemic  sufficiency  of   state
    protection in the receiving state, a claimant may still  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution if he can show that its authorities know or
    ought to know of circumstances particular to his case  giving  rise  to
    his fear but are unlikely to  provide  the  additional  protection  his
    particular circumstances reasonably require ... the threshold  of  risk
    required to engage Article 3 or reach the level of persecution  depends
    on the circumstances of each case, including the magnitude of the risk,
    the nature and severity of the ill treatment  risked  and  whether  the
    risk emanates from the state agency or non-state actors).

13. The Judge considered the country situation and gave adequate reasons to
    support  her  finding  that  the  police  could  offer  protection.  In
    rejecting the appellant's claim the Judge noted the appellant had never
    sought any protection from the police and could hardly argue that  such
    protection was not available.

14. I find the Judge engaged with the country evidence provided and reached
    a finding that was open to her. The appellant had to demonstrate  there
    was insufficiency of protection and whilst the situation  in  Venezuela
    is not the best at the moment, there was evidence the police were still
    functioning and providing protection. The situation  in  Venezuela  has
    not reached he level that article 3 is engaged.

15. Having satisfied herself that there was sufficiency of protection I  am
    satisfied she did not need to consider internal relocation.

NOTICE OF DECISION

I dismiss the appeal and uphold the original decision.


Signed                              Date     09/08/2019
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal no fee award can be made.


Signed                              Date     09/08/2019
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
