
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13974/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2020                           |On 27 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     KJ
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms. H. Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appeal came before me to be remade following the decision of Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson promulgated on 14 June 2019.


The hearing

 2. The Appellant was not represented.  He was assisted by the interpreter,
    Mr. Ali Zalme, who confirmed  that  they  both  fully  understood  each
    other.  The language used was Kurdish (Sorani).


 3. I explained to the Appellant that the outstanding issue to  be  decided
    was the feasibility of his  return  to  Iraq,  with  reference  to  the
    country guidance caselaw of SMO, KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT  00400  (IAC).   I  explained  that  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal up to and including  [45]  had  not
    been set aside, and that these findings related to his  account,  which
    had not been accepted.

 4. It was confirmed by Ms. Aboni that the Appellant would be  returned  to
    Baghdad, as stated in the reasons for refusal letter.  The Respondent's
    position was that the Appellant could then either return to Kirkuk,  or
    could relocate to the IKR.  She submitted that following  the  case  of
    SMO, there was no Article 15(c) or Article 3 risk for the Appellant  in
    Kirkuk.  She confirmed that it was accepted in the reasons for  refusal
    letter that the Appellant did not have a CSID.

 5. I explained these issues to the Appellant.  I explained how the hearing
    would proceed.  Ms. Aboni stated that she  had  no  questions  for  the
    Appellant.  I asked him  some  questions.   Ms.  Aboni  confirmed  that
    nothing had arisen out of these questions on which she wished to cross-
    examine the  Appellant.   Ms.  Aboni  made  submissions  to  which  the
    Appellant responded.  I reserved my decision.


 6. In addition to the  oral  evidence,  I  have  taken  into  account  the
    documents in the Respondent's bundle  (to  Annex  E),  the  Appellant's
    statement dated 18 January 2019 and the documents provided  by  Insight
    Healthcare.  I have also taken into account the country  guidance  case
    of SMO, promulgated since the Respondent's decision.

Decision

 7. As stated above, the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  up  to  and
    including [45] are preserved.  These findings relate to the Appellant's
    account which was not accepted.  It was found that  the  Appellant  was
    not of interest to the Iraqi police  [39],  nor  that  he  was  of  any
    interest to ISIS [44].


 8. The Appellant said in submissions that he had  had  other  problems  in
    Iraq relating to religion, as he was not  practising  Islam.   He  said
    that he had been beaten up by radicalised, strict  Muslims  who  wanted
    him to practise Islam and to contribute to the mosque.  He feared those
    groups in his area.  He said that he had told his solicitors about it.

 9. Ms. Aboni submitted that this was an attempt to embellish his claim  as
    he had not raised it before.  She referred to  Q113  and  Q114  of  his
    asylum interview where he had not  raised  any  other  issue,  and  had
    confirmed that there were no other reasons why he could not  return  to
    Iraq.

10. In response the Appellant said that this was not the main  reason  that
    he had left Iraq, but that he thought it right to mention it.   He  had
    not thought that these responses at interview  would  be  used  against
    him, as he thought that the interview questions only  referred  to  the
    "big matter".

11. I find that the Appellant was  given  the  opportunity  at  his  asylum
    interview to state if there were any other reasons that  he  wished  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, and he did not mention that he  had  been
    beaten up due to not practising Islam.  In  his  witness  statement  he
    said that he could not return to Baghdad as he was  Sunni  and  Baghdad
    was controlled by Shia.  He also said  that  he  was  a  non-practising
    Muslim "and this will be known" [6].  He made no  reference  to  having
    had any problems in the past, and no reference to  having  been  beaten
    up, on account of not practising Islam.

12. I do not accept the Appellant's claim made at this very late stage that
    he was beaten up in Iraq on account of not practising Islam.


Article 15(c)


13. The Appellant's account that he is at risk in Kirkuk was rejected.   It
    was submitted by Ms. Aboni that, following the case of SMO,  Kirkuk  is
    no longer a contested area.  Especially given that  the  Appellant  was
    not represented, I have carefully considered what SMO  says  about  any
    Article 15(c) risk.  SMO states at headnote [1]:


    "There continues to be an internal armed conflict in certain  parts  of
    Iraq, involving government forces, various militia and the remnants  of
    ISIL.  Following the military defeat of ISIL at the end of 2017 and the
    resulting reduction in levels of direct and indirect violence, however,
    the intensity of that conflict is not such that, as a  general  matter,
    there are substantial grounds for believing that any civilian  returned
    to Iraq, solely on account of his presence there, faces a real risk  of
    being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting  to  serious  harm
    within the scope of Article 15(c) QD."


14. The Appellant's area of Kirkuk does not fall into the exception to this
    set out at headnote [2].  The headnote states at [3]:


    "The situation in the Formerly Contested  Areas  (the  governorates  of
    Anbar,  Diyala,  Kirkuk,  Ninewah  and  Salah   Al-Din)   is   complex,
    encompassing ethnic, political and humanitarian issues which differ  by
    region.  Whether the return of an individual to such an area  would  be
    contrary to Article 15(c) requires a  fact-sensitive,  "sliding  scale"
    assessment to which the following matters are relevant."


15. [4] refers to perceived association with ISIL, which is not relevant to
    the Appellant [4].  Headnote [5] states:
    "The impact of any of the personal characteristics  listed  immediately
    below must be carefully assessed against the situation in the  area  to
    which return is contemplated, with particular reference to  the  extent
    of ongoing ISIL activity and the behaviour of the  security  actors  in
    control of that area."


16. The only one of the factors listed which may be  of  relevance  to  the
    Appellant is "Membership of a national, ethnic or religious group which
    is either in the minority in the area in question, or not in  de  facto
    control of that area".


17. The Appellant's home area is Kirkuk.  He is a Kurd, and a Sunni Muslim.
     At [300] of SMO  it  refers  to  minority  groups,  and  the  cautious
    approach which needs to  be  taken.   At  [252]  it  refers  to  ISIL's
    presence in Kirkuk:

    "ISIL controls no territory as such in Kirkuk  governorate  but  it  is
    certainly present and active, particularly  in  the  areas  surrounding
    Hawija and the Hamrin Mountains.  There  are  pockets  of  fighters  in
    these areas, or permanently operating attack cells, as  they  are  also
    called in the background material." [252]

18. The Appellant comes from Kirkuk.   While  there  is  evidence  of  ISIL
    activity in the area, it  does  not  control  any  territory,  and  the
    Appellant does not come from one of  the  areas  where  ISIL  are  most
    active.  SMO also refers to the presence  of  PMFs  in  the  area,  but
    namely in Hawija (see [29] of SMO).  This is not the  Appellant's  home
    area.  I find,  adopting  the  "sliding  scale"  assessment,  that  the
    Appellant's return to Kirkuk would not be contrary to Article 15(c).


Feasibility of return


19. It was confirmed that the Appellant would be returned  to  Baghdad.   I
    have therefore considered whether the Appellant would be able to travel
    from Baghdad to Kirkuk.  Following the case of  SMO  I  find  that  the
    Appellant would need a CSID for internal travel in Iraq.  I  find  that
    he will be able to be returned to Baghdad on a laissez passer but  this
    will not enable him to travel to Kirkuk.  SMO makes clear  at  headnote
    [12] that a laissez passer will be of no assistance in the absence of a
    CSID or INID.

20. At [15] of the headnote to  SMO  it  states  that  that  an  individual
    returnee who is not from Baghdad is not likely to be able to  obtain  a
    replacement document there, and certainly not within a reasonable time.



21. I find that the Appellant does not have a CSID.  It  was  submitted  by
    Ms. Aboni that the Appellant would be able to obtain a replacement CSID
    in the United Kingdom, or his family would be able to send his CSID  to
    him from Iraq, or alternatively his uncle would be able to  attend  the
    office in Kirkuk, obtain a proxy CSID card and meet  the  Appellant  in
    Baghdad for onward travel to Kirkuk.

22. At Q17 and Q18 of his asylum interview the Appellant  stated  that  his
    Iraqi ID papers were at home.  He stated in his  witness  statement  "I
    only have the nationality certificate" [7], which appears to imply that
    he has this in his possession.  He has not given any reason for why  he
    has not attempted to use the information contained on  his  nationality
    certificate to obtain a replacement CSID in the United Kingdom.

23. Further, paragraph [13] of the headnote to SMO states:

    "Notwithstanding  the  phased  transition  to  the  INID  within  Iraq,
    replacement CSIDs remain available through Iraqi  Consular  facilities.
    Whether an individual will be able to obtain a replacement CSID  whilst
    in the UK depends on  the  documents  available  and,  critically,  the
    availability of the volume and page  reference  of  the  entry  in  the
    Family Book in Iraq, which  system  continues  to  underpin  the  Civil
    Status Identity process.  Given the  importance  of  that  information,
    most Iraqi citizens will  recall  it.  That  information  may  also  be
    obtained from family members, although  it  is  necessary  to  consider
    whether such relatives are on the father's or the mother's side because
    the registration system is patrilineal."

24. At [391] of SMO it states: "We consider the number of  individuals  who
    do not know and could not ascertain their  volume  and  page  reference
    would be quite small, however."  At [392] it accepts that there will be
    some who "can plausibly claim not to know  these  details.   Those  who
    left Iraq at a particularly young age, those who  are  mentally  unwell
    and those who have issues with literacy or numeracy may all be able  to
    make such a claim plausibly but we consider that it will be  very  much
    the exception that an individual  would  be  unaware  of  a  matter  so
    fundamental to their own identity and that of their family."


25. I find that the Appellant left Iraq under two years ago when he was  21
    years old.  He would therefore have been in possession of his CSID less
    than two years ago.  He attended school until the age of 15  and  there
    is no evidence that he has any  problems  with  literacy  or  numeracy.
    Further, at [392] SMO concludes:

    "Even when we bear in mind the years of conflict  and  displacement  in
    Iraq, we would expect there to be only a small number of cases in which
    an individual could plausibly claim to have no means  of  contacting  a
    family member from whom the relevant volume and page reference could be
    obtained or traced back."

26. The Appellant said at his asylum interview said that  he  had  maternal
    and paternal uncles in Iraq.  His father  had  died  a  long  time  ago
    (Q11).  At Q12 he gave evidence that his mother and two  sisters  lived
    in Iraq.  At Q13 he said that he did not have any brothers.  There  are
    no preserved findings in  relation  to  contact  with  his  mother  and
    sisters.  At the hearing the Appellant said that he had spoken  to  his
    mother once last summer but he said that he was not in contact with her
    now.  He said that he was not in contact with his  uncle.   He  had  no
    means or resources to make contact with Iraq and when he had  asked  at
    the Nottingham Refugee Forum no-one had told him or advised him how  to
    contact his family.  Neither had his solicitor.

27. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  explanation
    given at Q79 and Q80 of the asylum  interview  for  why  he  could  not
    contact his uncle.  At [38]  he  found  it  highly  unlikely  that  the
    Appellant or his uncle would not have the means to contact one another.
     Bearing in mind this finding, and given that the Appellant had contact
    with his mother in 2019, I find that the Appellant  would  be  able  to
    make contact with his family in Iraq, including his uncle.  I find that
    he would be able to  obtain  the  necessary  information  to  obtain  a
    replacement CSID, if not the CSID card itself.

28. I therefore find that it is reasonably likely that  the  Appellant  has
    the necessary information to obtain a replacement CSID  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  If I am wrong in this, I find that it  is  reasonably  likely
    that he will be able to  obtain  the  necessary  information  from  his
    family.  The Appellant's family could send  the  CSID  to  him  in  the
    United Kingdom.  If it is out of date, he can use the information on it
    to  obtain  a  new  one  from  the  Embassy  in  the  United   Kingdom.
    Alternatively, he could be met in Baghdad by his  uncle  with  a  CSID,
    either the one he has left at home, or a replacement  one  obtained  by
    his uncle by proxy.  He could  then  travel  with  his  uncle  back  to
    Kirkuk.

29. I therefore find that the Appellant will be returning to Baghdad with a
    CSID or, alternatively, will be met by a family member in Baghdad  with
    a CSID.  He will then be able to travel onward either to Kirkuk,  where
    he can return to his family, or it is open to him to  relocate  to  the
    IKR.

30. I have considered whether it would reasonable to expect  the  Appellant
    to relocate there with reference to SMO.  The headnote states:

"24. Once at the IKR border (land or air) P would normally be granted  entry
to the territory. Subject to security screening,  and  registering  presence
with the local mukhtar, P would be permitted to enter and reside in the  IKR
with no further legal impediments or requirements. There are no  sponsorship
requirements for entry or residence in any of  the  three  IKR  Governorates
for Kurds.

25. Whether P would be  at  particular  risk  of  ill-treatment  during  the
security screening  process  must  be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case  basis.
Additional factors that may increase risk include: (i) coming from a  family
with a known association with ISIL, (ii)  coming  from  an  area  associated
with ISIL and (iii) being a single male of fighting age. P is likely  to  be
able to evidence the fact of recent arrival from the UK, which would  dispel
any suggestion of having arrived directly from ISIL territory.

26. If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms  would  require
that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances  P  would,  in  general,
have sufficient assistance from the family  so  as  to  lead  a  'relatively
normal life', which would not be unduly harsh. It is nevertheless  important
for decision-makers to determine the extent of any assistance likely  to  be
provided by P's family on a case by case basis.

27. For Kurds without the assistance of family in the IKR the  accommodation
options are limited:

        i) Absent special circumstances it is not reasonably likely that  P
           will be able to gain access to one of the refugee camps  in  the
           IKR; these camps  are  already  extremely  overcrowded  and  are
           closed to newcomers. 64% of IDPs  are  accommodated  in  private
           settings with the vast majority living with family members;


       ii) If P cannot live with a family member, apartments  in  a  modern
           block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent at a cost of
           between $300 and $400 per month;


      iii) P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement', living in an
           unfinished or  abandoned  structure,  makeshift  shelter,  tent,
           mosque, church or squatting in a government building.  It  would
           be unduly harsh to require P to relocate to the IKR  if  P  will
           live in a critical  housing  shelter  without  access  to  basic
           necessities such as food, clean water and clothing;

       iv)  In  considering  whether  P  would  be  able  to  access  basic
           necessities, account must be  taken  of  the  fact  that  failed
           asylum seekers are entitled to  apply  for  a  grant  under  the
           Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could give P  access  to  �1500.
           Consideration should also be  given  to  whether  P  can  obtain
           financial support from other sources such as (a) employment, (b)
           remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the  availability  of  ad
           hoc charity or by being able to access PDS rations.

28. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a  case-by-
case basis taking the following matters into account:


        i) Gender. Lone women are  very  unlikely  to  be  able  to  secure
           legitimate employment;


       ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is 70%;


      iii) P cannot work without a CSID or INID;

       iv) Patronage and nepotism  continue  to  be  important  factors  in
           securing employment. A returnee with family connections  to  the
           region will have  a  significant  advantage  in  that  he  would
           ordinarily  be  able  to  call  upon  those  contacts  to   make
           introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him;

        v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are  at  the
           greatest disadvantage, with  the  decline  in  the  construction
           industry reducing the number of labouring jobs available;

       vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with  ISIL,  that
           may deter prospective employers."


31. I find that the Appellant would be able to gain access to the IKR [24].
     I find that he would be returning as a single  male  of  fighting  age
    but, coming from the United Kingdom, this would dispel  any  suggestion
    of having arrived from ISIL territory [25].


32. With reference to [26] of the headnote,  the  Appellant's  evidence  is
    that he has no family in the IKR.  However, he has family in  Iraq,  in
    Kirkuk.  Paragraph [27] sets out the  difficulties  for  those  without
    family assistance in the IKR.  Going through the issues set out  there,
    I find that it is not reasonably likely that the Appellant  would  find
    accommodation in a refugee camp in the IKR (i).  There is no suggestion
    that the Appellant would be able to afford between  US$300  and  US$400
    per month from his own resources in order to rent  accommodation  (ii).
    At (iii) it states that he could resort to squatting, but it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect an individual to relocate to the IKR if he would
    live  in  a  "critical  housing  shelter"  without  access   to   basic
    necessities.

33. Any grant from the Voluntary Returns  Scheme  would  only  last  for  a
    limited period of time.  The Appellant would need to find employment to
    secure an income once that ran out.  He would have some family  support
    from his family in Iraq.  Ad hoc charity is not  a  long-term  solution
    (iv).

34. Factors to be taken into account when considering  employment  are  set
    out at [28] of the headnote.  There  is  70%  unemployment  (ii).   The
    Appellant would have a CSID so he would therefore be  allowed  to  work
    (iii).  There is an advantage for those with family  connections  (iv).
    The Appellant has no family connections in the IKR, but he  has  family
    in Kirkuk.  Skills, education and experience are  important  (v).   The
    Appellant's evidence is that he attended school until he was  about  15
    years old.  He worked at a car auction in Iraq for two to three  years.
    He said that he was responsible for general maintenance.  While he  has
    no specific skills or qualifications, he has some  education  and  also
    work experience.   I find that he would be able to find  some  form  of
    employment in the IKR, if  he  chose  to  relocate  there  rather  than
    returning to his family.   I find it is not unduly harsh to expect  him
    to relocate to the IKR.


Conclusions in relation to refugee protection, humanitarian  protection  and
Articles 2 and 3


35. Considering all the above, I do not find the Appellant's claim to be  a
    genuine refugee in need of international protection to be well founded.
     I find that he has failed to demonstrate that there  is  a  real  risk
    that he will suffer persecution on return to Iraq,  and  so  his  claim
    fails on asylum grounds.  I find that  he  does  not  have  substantial
    grounds for believing that, if returned to Iraq, he would face  a  real
    risk of suffering  serious  harm  and  so  his  claim  to  humanitarian
    protection fails.  I find that returning him to Iraq  would  not  cause
    the United Kingdom to be in breach of its obligations under Articles  2
    and 3 of the ECHR.

Article 8

36. Although no submissions were made in relation to Article 8, given  that
    the Appellant is not represented, I have considered Article 8.  I  have
    also considered the evidence of the Appellant's mental health.  At  the
    hearing the Appellant said that he had been  prescribed  medication  to
    help him to sleep, but had not been prescribed  any  other  medication.
    He had been referred to counselling, but could not see the  benefit  of
    "talking and  talking".   The  medical  evidence  before  me  is  dated
    September 2018.  I  have  no  more  up  to  date  evidence.   This  was
    submitted for the hearing of the First-tier Tribunal which  took  place
    in February 2019.  There is no evidence that the Appellant has had  any
    treatment since September 2018, when no formal diagnosis  was  made  in
    any event.  He gave no evidence at the hearing before me that there was
    any change to this position.  I find that there is no evidence to  show
    that his mental health is such that Articles 3 or 8 are engaged.

37. The Appellant has no relatives in the United Kingdom, nor does he  have
    a partner or child.  I find that he has no family  life  here  for  the
    purposes of Article 8.

38. In relation to  private  life,  I  find  that  he  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules.   He  has
    been in the United Kingdom for under two years.  He is  23  years  old.
    He has spent the vast majority of his life in Iraq.  I have found above
    that he can return to Iraq.  He has strong family, social, cultural and
    linguistic ties to Iraq.  I find that the Appellant has failed to  show
    that there are very significant obstacles  to  his  reintegration  into
    Iraq.

39. I have considered Article 8 outside the immigration rules in accordance
    with the steps set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  To the extent that he
    will have built up a private life in the short time that he has been in
    the United Kingdom sufficient to engage the operation of Article  8,  I
    find that the decision is an interference in his private life.   I find
    that the proposed interference would be in accordance with the law,  as
    being a regular immigration decision taken by UKBA in  accordance  with
    the immigration rules.  In terms of proportionality, the  Tribunal  has
    to strike a fair balance between the rights of the individual  and  the
    interests of the community.  The public interest in this  case  is  the
    preservation of orderly and fair immigration control in  the  interests
    of all citizens.  Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is
    self-evidently a very important public  interest.   In  practice,  this
    will usually trump the qualified rights of the individual,  unless  the
    level of interference is very significant.  I find that in  this  case,
    the level of interference would not be significant and that it would be
    proportionate.


40. In considering proportionality I have taken  into  account  all  of  my
    findings above.  I have taken into  account  the  factors  set  out  in
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, insofar as they  are  relevant.   Section
    117B(1) provides that the maintenance of effective immigration controls
    is in the public interest.  The Appellant cannot meet the  requirements
    of the immigration rules in relation  to  private  life.   There  is  a
    strong public interest in refusing leave to remain to those who do  not
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules.  I have no evidence  of
    the Appellant's  English  language  skills  (117(B)(2)).   He  used  an
    interpreter  at  the  hearing.   He  is  not  financially   independent
    (117B(3)).


41. Little weight is to be given to a private life established either  when
    a person had precarious leave, or when he was here unlawfully (117B(4),
    117B(5)).  The Appellant has never had leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and therefore I attach little  weight  to  his  private  life.
    Section 117B(6) is not relevant.

42. I find that the Appellant can return to Iraq where he will be  able  to
    re-establish his private life.  Taking into account all of  the  above,
    and giving weight to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control, I find the Appellant has failed  to  show  on  the
    balance of probabilities that the decision is a breach of his rights to
    a family or private life under Article 8  ECHR,  or  indeed  any  other
    rights protected by the Human Rights Act 1998.

Notice of Decision


43. The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.


44. The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.


45. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
[pic]
Signed                          14 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal so there can be no fee award.
[pic]

Signed                          14 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


