
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13178/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 07 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                Jaginder [N]
                       [Anonymity direction not made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Davies  promulgated  10.1.19,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  2.11.18,  to
    refuse her claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Keefe  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    30.1.19. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor granted permission.



 3. Pursuant to the directions of Judge Norton-Taylor, the  respondent  and
    the appellant have submitted skeleton arguments, which I have carefully
    considered and taken into account.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 5. In granting permission to appeal, Judge  Norton-Taylor  identified  the
    arguable errors of law as that the First-tier Tribunal:

      a) Failed to engage with relevant matters relating to the validity  of
         the husband's passport;

      b) Failed  to  engage  with  arguments  relating  to  the  appellant's
         inclusion within the Refugee Convention and  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         decision in TG (Interaction of Directives and  Rules)  [2016]  UKUT
         374 (IAC); and

      c) Misapplied the burden of proof in relation to material issues.

 6. The relevant background can be summarised as follows. The appellant  is
    an Afghan Sikh married to [HN], who was born in Afghanistan and  claims
    to be an Afghan national. However, the respondent does not accept  that
    the husband is Afghan and contends that as he holds an Indian  passport
    he is a national of India.

 7. Judge Davies found that  the  appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Afghanistan for a Convention reason, namely treatment of
    Sikhs going beyond mere harassment with an unwillingness of the  Afghan
    authorities  to  provide  effective  protection.  However,  the   judge
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that the appellant "could  return  to
    India with her husband and live there without risk of persecution." The
    judge accepted the respondent's  contention  that  the  husband  is  an
    Indian national and the appellant could return to India with him, where
    they  have  previously  lived  together,  without  being  at  risk   of
    persecution or serious harm.

 8. At the hearing before me, it was agreed that  the  appellant's  husband
    had previously claimed asylum, which claim was refused and certified on
    the basis that he could return to  India  without  risk.  Mr  Tan  also
    suggested that in his claim the husband had put  forward  that  he  was
    India. However, this was challenged by  Mr  Schewenk  and  Mr  Tan  was
    unable to produced the refusal decision in respect of the  husband.  In
    any event, it is clear that no such  information  was  put  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the present case.

The Challenge to Indian Nationality

 9. Judge Davies stated at [75] that no evidence had been put before him to
    suggest to the lower standard that the passport is anything other  than
    valid and it was noted that in the appellant's visa application it  was
    stated that the  husband  is  an  Indian  national,  although  born  in
    Afghanistan.

10. The appellant's case  was  that  the  Indian  passport  was  improperly
    obtained to enable him to visit the appellant in the UK. It  is  denied
    that he is legally entitled to the passport and denied that  he  is  an
    Indian national. At [75] Judge Davies observed  that  no  evidence  had
    been put before the tribunal to demonstrate to the  lower  standard  of
    proof that the passport is anything other than  valid.  No  explanation
    had been provided as  to  why  the  Indian  authorities  had  not  been
    contacted to verify the validity or otherwise of the passport.

11. The grounds complain that the judge ignored the arguments  advanced  in
    support of the contention  that  the  passport  was  not  valid.  These
    pointed to various issues including that  the  date  of  birth  on  the
    document is incorrect, that he does not qualify for Indian nationality,
    and as he now has an Afghan passport and India  does  not  accept  dual
    nationality he cannot be regarded as Indian. None  of  these  arguments
    were addressed in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Further,
    given that it is the respondent who makes the positive  assertion  that
    the husband is of Indian nationality rather than Afghan, the burden  is
    on the respondent to prove  that  to  the  standard  of  a  balance  of
    probabilities. The way in which the judge suggested at [75] that it was
    for the appellant to establish that the husband is not entitled to  the
    passport  indicates  a  reversal  of  the  burden  of  proof   and   is
    inconsistent with the Home  Office  Guidance  of  October  2017,  which
    states under the heading 'Disputed nationality and  other  cases,'  "If
    the Home Office considers the claimant to  be  a  specific  nationality
    other than that claimed, the burden of proof rests with the Home Office
    to prove the  assertion  according  to  the  balance  of  probabilities
    standard (this is a higher threshold than the lower standard of proof -
    reasonable likelihood - mentioned above). The test is met if it is more
    likely than not that the claimant holds the asserted nationality."

12. Further difficulty arises in the evidence put before the tribunal  that
    the appellant did not meet the criteria for Indian  citizenship,  which
    requires seven years' prior residence. It was also argued at the First-
    tier Tribunal that as the husband now had an Afghan passport this would
    have invalidated any Indian citizenship as India does not accept  dual-
    nationals.

13. In the circumstances, I find that the judge's approach  on  this  issue
    amounted to an error of law.  I  am  satisfied  that  it  was  for  the
    respondent to demonstrate on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    husband is in fact or is entitled to Indian  nationality.  Mr  Tan  was
    unable to counter this assertion. Whilst there was some  evidence  that
    could have been relied on, the judge did not engage with the issue  and
    in any event effectively reversed the burden of proof.

14. Even if I am wrong and there was sufficient evidence to demonstrate  on
    the balance of probabilities that the appellant's husband is Indian  or
    at  least  entitled  to  Indian  citizenship,  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant would be entitled  to  accompany  him  and  settle  there  is
    lacking. At [78] the judge merely stated that he believed "on the basis
    that the Appellant's husband is an Indian national  and  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant has lived with her husband in India previously  that
    she would have the right to enter India as a dependent of her husband."
    That is insufficient to discharge the burden of proof on the respondent
    and for the judge to suggest that there was  no  evidence  to  indicate
    that she could not do "it is not reasonably likely that she  could  not
    return to India with her husband," amounts to an error of law.

If the husband is in fact Indian, does this defeat the protection claim?

15. Even if the appellant's husband is Indian and even if she  is  entitled
    to accompany him and settle there, there are further issues  that  have
    not been  adequately  addressed  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

16. The appellant relied, in skeleton arguments submitted to both the First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal,  on  TG,  where  the  issue  was
    whether a Chinese national from Tibet could relocate to India so as  to
    exclude him from the benefits of the Refugee Convention. That appellant
    argued  that  the  exclusionary  provisions  in  Article  1E   (Refugee
    convention) and the Qualification Directive (339C) do not apply  as  he
    was unable to return to India and would not be recognised as having the
    same or equivalent rights to an Indian National.

17. Paragraph 334(v) of the Rules provides  that  refugee  status  will  be
    granted if "refusing their  application  would  result  in  them  being
    required to go (whether immediately or after the time  limited  by  any
    existing leave to enter or remain) in breach of the Refugee Convention,
    to a country in which their life or  freedom  would  be  threatened  on
    account of their race,  religion,  nationality,  political  opinion  or
    membership of a particular social group." The determinative issue in TG
    was whether the appellant  could  go  to  India  and  there  receive  a
    sufficiency of protection. The Upper Tribunal held that the  burden  of
    demonstrating that the appellant would be readmitted to India and  have
    a level of international protection  equivalent  to  that  afforded  by
    refugee status in an EU state lay on the respondent to the standard  of
    a balance of probabilities.  This  burden  was  distinguished  from  MA
    (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289, where the Court of Appeal had held that
    to prove her claimed nationality, the applicant was  under  a  duty  to
    take all reasonable steps in good faith to obtain  documents  from  the
    authorities of her State of nationality.

18. In fact, there appears to have been little cogent evidence, other  than
    the fact of the husband's Indian passport, to support the contention of
    the respondent that he is Indian and that she could  accompany  him  to
    India and have  adequate  protection  there.  The  judge  accepted  the
    contention, noting in addition that they had both previously  lived  in
    India  without  apparent  difficulty  (although  the  length  of   such
    residence being months or years was a  matter  under  challenge);  were
    able to obtain accommodation; and that the husband was able to  open  a
    bank account there. The judge also found that the appellant  had  taken
    no steps to establish if she would be admitted to India.

19. However, this also begs  the  question  as  to  whether  in  India  the
    appellant would be entitled to rights equivalent to those of an  Indian
    national so as to exclude her from protection  under  Article  1E.  The
    Immigration Rules at paragraph 334(v) provides  that  the  requirements
    for a grant of refugee status cannot lay  down  any  conditions  for  a
    grant of refugee status in the UK that are "less generous" than or  are
    more restrictive than, or are incompatible with, the conditions  for  a
    grant of refugee status in the EU. Effectively, the Tribunal would have
    had to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that not only would
    the appellant be admitted into India but that the rights and protection
    she would be afforded there were no less than equal to those enjoyed by
    a refugee in the UK, or any other EU state. No evidence on  this  issue
    was put before the tribunal one way or the other.

20. The respondent's skeleton argument at [5] accepts that "the  judge  did
    not correctly apply the burden and standard of proof in relation to the
    issue of the appellant returning to India." However, it was argued that
    the error was immaterial as  application  of  the  correct  burden  and
    standard of proof would have led to the same outcome. I  do  not  agree
    and Mr Tan accepted that  he  was  in  some  difficulty  defending  the
    skeleton argument and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  this
    issue. None of this was adequately addressed by  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   In  the  absence  of  any  cogent  evidence  to
    demonstrate that the appellant would be admitted  to  India  and  there
    enjoy sufficient protection, I am satisfied that the  respondent  could
    not have discharged the burden of proof on this issue.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal fails to demonstrate  that  the
    judge adequately grappled with this second but important issue and that
    the correct burden and standard of proof was applied in  resolving  the
    issue.

22. In all the circumstances, I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was made in error of law on what  were  material  issues,  and
    included at least one instance of a reversal of the burden of proof  as
    to (a) whether the  appellant's  husband  is  an  Indian  national,  as
    claimed by the respondent, and (b) whether in any event  the  appellant
    would be admitted to India in conditions where she would be entitled to
    protection on terms and conditions no less generous than for a grant of
    refugee status in the EU.

23. On the unchallenged  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant is entitled in principle to refugee status and  on  the  very
    limited and inadequate evidence put before the tribunal that she  could
    be admitted to India as the spouse of  an  Indian  national  and  there
    enjoy sufficient protection, I  find  that  respondent  has  failed  to
    discharge the  burden  of  proof  to  the  standard  of  a  balance  of
    probabilities. It follows that the appeal must be allowed.

Decision

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set aside aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.




                    Signed DMW Pickup


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make a whole fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been allowed.




                    Signed DMW Pickup


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated
