


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/13941/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |    Decision and Reasons         |
|                                 |Promulgated                      |
|On 23 May 2018                   |    On 14 June 2018              |
|                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    I. J.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms McCallum, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
                       Hartigan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant came to the UK legitimately as a student on 3 May  2015.
      On 21 May 2016, that is a little over a year later, he claimed  asylum
      on the basis of his sexuality, arguing that he had  been  attacked  in
      Serbia in the past, having been perceived to be a homosexual, and that
      he did not believe that he would be safe anywhere in Serbia to make  a
      life in the future as an openly gay man.  He argued that  the  Serbian
      authorities paid lip service to the notion of freedom of expression of
      an individual's sexuality and that there was a  mismatch  between  his
      own experiences (and the experiences of other  individuals),  and  the
      stance that was adopted by  the  authorities  with  respect  to  major
      events, permitting and indeed policing an event such as the Gay  Pride
      marches which occurred from time to time in the capital.

   2. The Respondent refused that application for asylum, taking a number of
      points against the credibility of  the  Appellant's  account.  One  of
      which was her stated conclusion that she was not satisfied that he was
      telling the truth about his sexuality.  The  Appellant's  appeal  duly
      came before Judge Oliver in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  18  January
      2017. Permission to appeal that decision was granted to the Respondent
      on 25 July 2017, and thus the matter came before me at Field House  on
      5 October 2017. By decision promulgated on 18 October 2017 I concluded
      that the Judge had indeed erred in law, and set aside his decision  in
      the following terms, so that the appeal was  adjourned  to  allow  the
      Upper Tribunal to remake the decisions upon the asylum and  Article  3
      appeals.

 2) On any view his decision promulgated on 14 March 2017 is  a  brief  one
    given the wealth of material that was placed  before  him.   There  are
    only the most brief  findings  of  fact  and  very  little  by  way  of
    assessment of the evidence to be  found  in  that  decision.   However,
    before  me  today  the  acceptance  that  the  Appellant  is  indeed  a
    homosexual man and in  an  openly  gay  relationship  is  unchallenged,
    notwithstanding the paucity of reasons offered for the conclusion  that
    he was, given the number of reasons offered by the Respondent  for  her
    conclusion that he was not. Again, notwithstanding the  rather  curious
    approach taken to section 8 of the 2002 Act.

 3) What prompted the Respondent's application for permission to appeal was
    instead the Judge's approach to what followed as a consequence to  that
    finding of fact, namely the inadequacy of the Judge's assessment  (such
    as it was) of the evidence before him in relation to the risk faced  by
    openly gay individuals in Serbia upon the perception of their sexuality
    by members of the general public, and their ability to obtain any  form
    of adequate protection from the authorities, across the entirety of the
    country. Indeed the relevant passage in the decision is confined to one
    sentence, which is to be found in the midst of  paragraph  30  of  that
    decision, the remainder of which  deals  with  other  matters.  In  the
    circumstances I am satisfied that the Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for that conclusion, and indeed identify an adequate assessment
    of the conflicting evidence on that issue in the course of his decision
    and in consequence  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  does  indeed
    disclose a material error of law.

 4) The question for me  then  becomes  what  is  the  most  practical  and
    pragmatic way of disposing of the appeal.   Both  parties  agreed  that
    this is not a case that  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  for
    rehearing, and I agree.  After some discussion both parties were agreed
    that the proper course for this appeal was that it should  be  retained
    in the Upper Tribunal for the remaking of the decision  on  the  asylum
    appeal and Article 3 appeal - albeit not for remaking today.   What  is
    required of the Upper Tribunal is of  course  a  nuanced  decision  and
    assessment of the conflicting relevant evidence, and neither  party  is
    in a  position  to  address  the  need  for  that  today.   Indeed,  on
    reflection, and notwithstanding the lack of any formal application  yet
    made to permit them to do so, both parties would wish to adduce further
    evidence on the relevant issue. For my own part, I would  venture  that
    it may be that this is a suitable case to offer the  Upper  Tribunal  a
    vehicle in which it could offer country guidance.

   3. The appeal having been adjourned for directions,  the  Upper  Tribunal
      declined on 21 March 2018 to accept the appeal for  country  guidance,
      and issued Directions for  the  future  conduct  of  the  appeal.  The
      Appellant then took the opportunity to file further  evidence  in  two
      bundles, the first paginated and indexed filed on  15  May  2018,  the
      second indexed but unpaginated and filed by fax of 18 May 2018. Within
      the first bundle are the materials that were before the  FtT,  and,  a
      further statement from the Appellant and his  father,  and,  a  report
      dated 11 May 2018 prepared by Dr Koen Slootmaeckers.  In  addition  Ms
      McCallum has helpfully prepared a skeleton  argument  that  is  cross-
      referenced to those bundles.

   4. Notwithstanding the expressed intention to do so when the  appeal  was
      last before me, or  the  Directions  issued  on  21  March  2018,  the
      Respondent has filed no further evidence, and no skeleton argument for
      the appeal in response to the Appellant's evidence. It would have been
      helpful to have received the results of enquiries of the type that the
      Respondent made in LZ (homosexuals) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT  487,  but
      this step was not taken.

   5. Mr Clarke accepts for the purposes of  this  appeal  that  I  can  and
      should treat Dr Slootmaeckers as a suitably  qualified  expert  within
      the field in which  he  has  offered  opinion  evidence.  Although  no
      request has been made for Dr Slootmaeckers to be tendered  for  cross-
      examination, the Respondent's position is however that his evidence is
      flawed, and that there is little weight  I  can  attach  to  it  as  a
      result. I will return to that argument below.

   6. Neither party proposed that I should hear further  oral  evidence.  As
      both parties accept, my starting point must be the preserved  findings
      of primary fact, as follows;
 i) The Appellant is homosexual [31]
ii) The Appellant experienced violent attacks on three different  occasions
    from members of the general public in his home area, as a result of his
    perceived sexuality [31]
iii) The Appellant was sufficiently injured in  each  of  those  attacks  to
    require medical attention - in the third he was  struck  with  a  metal
    truncheon
iv) The Appellant received no indication from  the  authorities  that  they
    proposed to investigate either of these attacks when he  reported  each
    of those three attacks to the police [30]
 v) The Appellant acted with a degree of discretion in  connection  to  his
    lifestyle, whilst living in Serbia, out of fear [31]
vi) The Appellant had relished the opportunity to be more  open  about  his
    sexuality whilst living in the UK, and would wish to continue to do so,
    but he would not do so if returned to Serbia as a  result  of  fear  of
    further attacks [31]

   7. Ms McCallum argued that in the light of these findings  the  Appellant
      had established;

 i) that he was the victim of past persecution

ii) that he had a subjectively well founded fear of future persecution as a
    result

iii) that the evidence did not establish any material change for the  better
    since 2015, and so his fear was objectively well founded too

   8. Relying upon the  expert  evidence,  and  the  reports  now  filed  in
      evidence, Ms McCallum argued that  in  the  absence  of  any  rebuttal
      evidence from the Respondent, that there was  no  adequate  system  of
      state protection for homosexuals in  Serbia,  and  that  the  risk  of
      violence that the Appellant faced was country wide so  that  it  could
      not be avoided by relocation.

   9. Mr Clarke accepts on behalf of the Respondent that gay men  in  Serbia
      constitute a particular social group for the purposes of article 1A(2)
      of the Convention. He argued however,  notwithstanding  the  preserved
      findings, that the Appellant had failed to establish;

 i) that he was the victim of past persecution,

ii) that he had a well founded fear of future persecution, or,

iii) that Serbia was unable or unwilling to discharge its duty to  establish
    and operate a  system  for  the  protection  of  its  citizens  against
    persecution on account of their sexuality.

  10. Mr Clarke argued that it was  not  disputed  that  the  three  violent
      attacks each constituted a criminal  act  under  Serbian  law.  Whilst
      neither the Appellant nor any other victim  of  violent  crime  should
      reasonably be expected to tolerate such violence, it  did  not  follow
      that the attacks that he suffered constituted  "persecution"  for  the
      purposes of that term as used within article 1A(2) of the  Convention.
      The Appellant had never suggested that he was ever attacked  by  state
      agents. Whilst the non state agent individuals who  attacked  him  had
      indeed reacted to their perception of the Appellant's  sexuality,  his
      own account of the attacks, and of the actions of his attackers, meant
      that his attackers had taken steps to hide their identities  from  him
      or  any  other  witnesses.  Thus  it   followed   that   they   feared
      identification, and, in consequence the  potential  for  reaction  and
      retribution by the state through arrest, prosecution, and, punishment.
      Thus the Appellant's evidence (even at its highest) did not  establish
      that his attackers believed that they could  act  with  impunity,  or,
      that their actions would be condoned by the state.  There  is  plainly
      significant force in this argument.

  11. Mr Clarke went  on  to  argue,  given  the  Appellant's  inability  to
      identify his attackers, that there was little that the police could be
      expected to do, and thus nothing should be inferred as  to  the  state
      attitude from the failure to  identify  the  attackers  and  prosecute
      them. In my judgement there  is  less  force  in  each  limb  of  this
      argument. It is far from unknown for the victims of  criminals  to  be
      unable to identify those responsible to the police, but  an  effective
      police force does not refuse to respond at all in such  circumstances.
      An effective police force  will  take  some  steps  to  investigate  a
      reported crime, although  no  doubt  the  resources  available  to  be
      devoted to such an investigation, and thus its depth  and  width  will
      vary both from country to country,  and  between  different  types  of
      crime, depending upon local and national priorities.  Thus  the  steps
      taken to investigate will necessarily vary, but an outright refusal to
      investigate may be indicative of a general state  attitude.  The  mere
      failure to identify a criminal will not however, of itself, indicate a
      lack of state protection; even in the most heavily  policed  societies
      the police are not always able to identify the  perpetrators  of  some
      offences.

  12. In relation to the  police  report  of  the  first  attack,  what  the
      Appellant described as having occurred was  not  simply  being  turned
      away by the police station [WS #36-7]. On his account in  his  witness
      statement details were taken of the crime he reported, and he was  not
      simply turned away. A record of the incident was made. Thus he resiled
      from the position he had taken at  interview  [Q175-6].  His  evidence
      does not demonstrate a refusal to investigate this attack.

  13. In relation to the police report of the second attack,  the  Appellant
      again accepts that the police seemed willing to  listen  to  him,  and
      again took his details [WS #46]. Thus again he accepted that a  record
      of the incident was made. Thus he again resiled from the  position  he
      had taken at interview [Q182]. His evidence  does  not  demonstrate  a
      refusal to investigate this attack.

  14. In relation to the police report of the  third  attack  the  Appellant
      said in his witness statement that although he did not report that  he
      was gay, the officers he spoke to refused to take  him  seriously  and
      refused to write anything down. He inferred that they knew he was gay,
      as a result  of  discussion  of  the  two  previous  reports,  and  he
      concluded that it was as a result  of  his  sexuality  they  were  not
      prepared to listen to him. Thus details of the incident were not taken
      [WS #50]. The Appellant explained that he had no choice but to  return
      each time to the same  police  station,  because  crimes  have  to  be
      reported to the local police  station,  and  if  he  tried  to  report
      elsewhere he would simply be referred back to his local police station
      [WS #51].

  15. Whether a national police force is effective or  not,  is  not  to  be
      measured against the standards of the response that might be  expected
      within the UK. If there had been a refusal to act at all upon  any  of
      the reports of such homophobic violence that the Appellant had made on
      three different occasions to the same police station,  it  could  have
      been at least indicative of a culture prevalent at that time,  amongst
      the officers stationed at that police station, that would condone such
      acts. However that was not what  the  Appellant  described  as  having
      occurred in his witness statement. There was  no  refusal  to  act  in
      relation to the first or second attacks -  only  the  third.  On  each
      occasion he saw different police officers.

  16. Mr Clarke also argued  that  the  Appellant's  own  evidence  did  not
      disclose an unwillingness on the part of the authorities in general to
      act in response to his reports of homophobic  attacks  upon  him.  The
      Appellant had only ever reported  the  three  attacks  to  one  police
      station. He had made no attempt to report the attacks to  a  different
      police station, and  so  his  evidence  did  not  disclose  a  general
      unwillingness to act across the police force generally, even if it did
      suggest that the officers stationed at one particular  police  station
      were unwilling to do so.

  17. Moreover, save for the three violent attacks, which Mr  Clarke  argued
      were isolated criminal events (despite the fact that they had occurred
      over an  eight  month  period;  3.8.13,  17.11.13,  and  18.3.14)  the
      Appellant had  not  described  at  interview  experiencing  any  other
      problems as a result of his sexuality. The highest his case  could  be
      otherwise put was that people had been rude about him  to  his  sister
      [WS #53] - it was only after the interview that he had suggested  that
      he had himself received verbal homophobic abuse  in  the  street  from
      strangers [WS #54], although he gave no details of  the  frequency  or
      content of this  experience,  and  it  is  unclear  why  he  would  be
      identified as homosexual and so targeted by a stranger. If this was  a
      real problem, one could also  have  expected  the  Appellant  to  have
      mentioned it at interview. Thus Mr Clarke argued the Appellant had not
      established that he faced  a  real  risk  upon  return  to  Serbia  of
      experiencing state sponsored, or state condoned, discrimination in his
      day to day life, or, employment.



Dr Slootmaeckers

  18. Turning to the report of Dr Slootmaeckers, Mr Clarke argued  that  the
      author's approach to the appeal demonstrated two major errors.  First,
      he had failed to place his opinions within the  proper  context  of  a
      Serbian population estimated to be 7.5m. Mr Clarke suggested that on a
      1:10 ratio, that should indicate a  population  of  some  750,000  who
      would be gay. In any event, there must be a significant gay population
      within Belgrade itself in order to generate the  level  of  activities
      occurring within Gay Pride week. Second, by  concentrating  upon  past
      attitudes the author had failed to give proper credit to  the  Serbian
      authorities for the steps that they had undoubtedly taken  since  2013
      to address homophobic attitudes within the population.

  19. There is  plainly  some  force  in  the  first  criticism  because  Dr
      Slootmaeckers has not addressed within his report the likely  size  of
      the gay community either within the Serbian population as a whole, or,
      within Belgrade itself. Nor has his report engaged with  the  evidence
      that is before me, which indicates the scale of the public  activities
      currently undertaken in Belgrade during Gay Pride week (over 50 public
      activities and events), or the number of public activities  undertaken
      by the gay community in Belgrade during the year.

  20. Whilst Dr Slootmaeckers has relied heavily upon the  results  of  some
      polls [cf #13], he has not identified the numbers who were polled,  or
      how those polls were conducted. The methodology behind  the  sampling,
      and the questioning employed, is entirely unexplained. Nor has he made
      any effort to  distinguish  between  the  responses  provided  by  the
      different categories of person either within the  general  population,
      or, within the LGBT community, who did  respond  to  these  polls.  Mr
      Clarke may have been putting it  too  highly  when  he  criticised  as
      completely worthless the polling evidence, as a  statistical  sampling
      exercise, but I accept the force in  the  criticism.  Any  assumptions
      drawn by Dr Slootmaeckers from these polls (such as that they revealed
      "the tip of the iceberg"), must be seen in their proper context.

  21. There is in my judgement less force in the second criticism. It is  in
      my judgement important to understand the historical context  in  order
      to understand why homophobic attitudes are said to  be  so  widespread
      and  deeply  entrenched  within  the   Serbian   population.   As   Dr
      Slootmaeckers explains (and there is no evidence from  the  Respondent
      to rebut this opinion) homophobia was a key part  of  the  nationalist
      movement, so that homosexuals were identified as enemies of the state,
      and a threat to both the state  itself  and  the  moral  structure  of
      Serbian society. Nationalism continues to  dominate  Serbian  politics
      and society, and so in his opinion homophobic rhetoric continues to be
      a key  part  of  the  public  message  of  both  politicians  and  the
      leadership of the Serbian Orthodox Church. That Church has  enjoyed  a
      resurgence in influence as part of the nationalist movement,  and  its
      leadership has also used homophobic language to align the Church  with
      that  movement  and  so  gain  influence.  The  net  result  was  that
      homophobia was seen in Serbia as patriotic, because homosexuality  was
      seen as a threat to the existence of the  emerging  nation  state.  Dr
      Slootmaeckers argues that whilst homosexuality was  decriminalised  in
      1994, homophobic attitudes actually became more entrenched within  the
      general public after the war, because that was the stance promoted  by
      both nationalist politicians and church leaders.  Given  the  evidence
      that is before me I see no reason  not  to  accept  that  this  is  an
      accurate reflection of the historical context.  I  have  more  concern
      however as to whether this remains an accurate picture.

  22. In my judgement it is within this context that the evidence concerning
      Gay Pride events in Belgrade should be considered. The first Gay Pride
      Parade in Belgrade  was  held  in  2001,  but  the  participants  were
      physically attacked by a group  of  individuals  who  appear  to  have
      formed as a mob  with  the  specific  intention  of  breaking  it  up,
      estimated by Dr Slootmaeckers to be about a thousand strong. There  is
      no evidence before me to indicate the number of  participants  in  the
      Parade on this occasion, and the source of Dr Slootmaeckers'  estimate
      of the size of the mob is also unclear. It is not in  dispute  however
      that such a violent mob did  form.  Unsurprisingly  the  fifty  police
      officers who were on duty at the Parade were unable to deal  with  the
      situation  that  developed.  Although  the  officers  on   duty   were
      criticised  by  some  commentators  quoted  by  Dr  Slootmaeckers   as
      effectively standing aside from protecting  the  participants  in  the
      Parade from the mob, it is clear that the authorities completely  lost
      control of the event, and the area in which it was being held, and  it
      is not at all clear to me that the criticisms of the officers on  duty
      he quotes are justified.

  23. An attempt to hold a Gay Pride event in 2004 was abandoned as a result
      of threats of violence that  the  police  said  they  were  unable  to
      counter. The next attempt to hold  a  Gay  Pride  event  was  in  2009
      following the adoption in Serbia of  anti-discrimination  legislation.
      The event was cancelled however at the last  minute  when  the  police
      again said they were unable to protect the participants. In  the  lead
      up to cancellation the event and its organisers had  faced  widespread
      intimidation and public threats of violence.

  24. In 2010 the second Gay Pride Parade did take  place  in  Belgrade,  an
      event that was attended  by  EU  officials,  and  other  international
      diplomats. This event, and its participants, were physically  attacked
      by a group of individuals who, the sources appear to agree, had formed
      specifically to break it up. On this occasion the mob was estimated to
      be about six to eight thousand strong. Although  the  authorities  had
      themselves deployed thousands of police in anticipation  of  violence,
      they again found themselves well outnumbered, and again  lost  control
      of the mob, and the area in which the event was taking  place.  Indeed
      the evidence suggests that there was a widespread loss of  control  in
      the face of the riot  that  developed.  Whilst  the  authorities  were
      largely able to  protect  the  participants  in  the  event  from  the
      rioters; the police, and the city of Belgrade itself,  became  instead
      the targets for the rioters. Petrol bombs were  used,  and  there  was
      widespread looting, with damage estimated at in  excess  of  E1m,  and
      with 140 people injured.

  25. In 2011, 2012, and 2013 the Gay Pride Parade events that were  planned
      were cancelled shortly before they were scheduled to take place,  with
      the authorities again citing the threat of violence as the reason  for
      doing so.

  26. In 2014 the Gay Pride Parade event did take place, with  7,000  police
      on duty. There were no major incidents.  The  event  has  since  taken
      place annually, albeit with heavy security measures,  and  there  have
      been no major incidents.  That  evidence  plainly  represents  a  very
      significant improvement, particularly when  the  news  reports  relied
      upon by the Appellant identify the parade itself in 2017 as  only  one
      event held during a "Pride Week" that encompasses over  fifty  events,
      including  the  International  Conference  on  hate  crimes  and  hate
      rhetoric [C 97-100].  Moreover  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  Serbian
      authorities were sufficiently confident of public attitudes that  only
      500 police were on duty for the 2017 parade. That  confidence  appears
      to have been well placed, since no incidents were reported [C104].

  27. Whether or not this was a response to criticisms that had been  raised
      by the EU, it is therefore plain that a major effort has been made  to
      ensure that Gay Pride events can take place within  Belgrade  annually
      in safety. Those events are not limited to one day per annum, in which
      there is a heavily policed parade. Quite clearly the events  that  now
      take place in safety go well beyond that. There is a week of  over  50
      events to celebrate Gay Pride, and a further event three months later.
      I accept that the evidence before me is  focused  upon  Belgrade,  and
      that there is no indication as to whether similar  events  take  place
      outside the capital.

  28. Whilst the perceived need to provide 7,000 police officers  to  police
      the 2014 Gay Pride parade within the capital suggests a  very  serious
      concern over what might otherwise  occur  in  their  absence,  and  of
      course the event had not taken place in previous years because of  the
      violence that occurred when it was last held in  2010,  it  is  in  my
      judgement also indicative  of  a  real  political  will,  and  a  real
      commitment of state resources, which should not be under-estimated.

  29. Unsurprisingly the parties were divided  upon  whether  the  political
      will was to provide a message in 2014 for a  domestic,  or  a  foreign
      audience - although the reality  must  be  that  any  message(s)  were
      directed at both. In my judgement the immediate short term message  to
      the domestic audience was self evident. "Do not  disrupt  the  event",
      and, "any attempt to do so will be crushed". There was however  in  my
      judgement undoubtedly a wider longer  term  message  to  the  domestic
      audience promoting tolerance. The foreign audience were clearly  being
      told that there was now the political will to change attitudes  within
      Serbian society, and to refuse to condone homophobia. The real  issue,
      as both representatives appear to agree, is therefore whether  or  not
      that wider political message  to  the  foreign  audience  is  yet  the
      reality.

  30. In the period 2014-2018, away from the  Gay  Pride  Parade  event,  Dr
      Slootmaeckers has recorded very few homophobic attacks as having taken
      place. In 2014 - one [C124 #25]. In 2015 - three [C125 #27-8]. In 2016
      - two [C125 #29-30]. In 2017 and 2018 - none. On  the  other  hand  he
      reports that the NGO Da Se Zna (formed to  record  instances  of  LGBT
      hate crimes) has received reports of 20  unspecified  hate  crimes,  2
      incidences of discrimination, and 5 instances of hate speech,  in  the
      period January-November 2017. From another source I note that this NGO
      had received over 70 reports of hate crimes against  LGBT  persons  in
      the eighteen months since its formation [C98], which I take to include
      the period referred to by Dr Slootmaeckers. These figures appear to me
      to be low given the size of the population, and sit uneasily with  the
      opinions offered by Dr Slootmaeckers.

  31. It is also relevant to note  that  in  June  2017  Serbia's  President
      appointed  an  openly  lesbian  Prime  Minister;   Ana   Brnabic.   Dr
      Slootmaeckers considers  this  to  be  simply  a  cynical  politically
      strategic step by the President (who was the previous Prime Minister).
      He notes that the appointment was by way of a reshuffle taken  without
      an election, and suggests that it was a step taken in order to seek to
      mislead  the  international  community  into  accepting  Serbia  as  a
      progressive liberal LGBT friendly country [C128  #40-3].  That  stance
      appears to me to belittle Ms Brnabic's skills, and, to ignore the fact
      that she must have been elected in the first  place  in  order  to  be
      available for  appointment.  In  short  this  opinion  strikes  me  as
      partisan, and lacking a properly objective assessment of the evidence.
      If attitudes within Serbia were in truth as simple and  as  vehemently
      homophobic as Dr Slootmaeckers suggests, then I find it very difficult
      to see how such an appointment would be politically possible.

  32. In addition to the opinions of Dr Slootmaeckers, the Appellant  relied
      upon a number of other internationally produced reports in evidence. I
      am satisfied that the principal reports, and the most reliable, appear
      to me to be; (i) Being LGBT  in  Serbia,  USAID  2017  ["2017  USAID"]
      [C44], (ii) the Serbia 2017 Human Rights Report, ["2017  HR"]  [C101],
      (iii) the ECRI report on Serbia, 16 May 2017 ["2017 ECRI"], and,  (iv)
      the European Commission report dated 17 April 2018;  Commission  Staff
      Working Document, Serbia 2018 ["2018 EC"]. I  consider  it  surprising
      that Dr Slootmaeckers has made only very limited  reference  to  their
      content.

  33. 2017 USAID reported that whilst the  authorities  had  made  important
      efforts to strengthen the position of LGBT people in Serbia, there was
      still a need for stronger political support  to  promote  respect  for
      their rights. A  survey  of  public  office  holders  indicated  there
      remained a high tolerance of discrimination against sexual  minorities
      and  prejudice  towards  those  living  with  HIV.  LBGT  people   are
      discriminated against in the workplace, although there is little  data
      available. Legislation has been in place since 2009 to  prohibit  such
      discrimination, and so whilst judicial remedies are  available,  these
      are said to be often ineffective in practice. Whilst the Pride  Parade
      enjoyed political and institutional support, nearly 90% of respondents
      to a 2015 survey were opposed to it.

  34. 2017 HR reported that although the law prohibits discrimination  based
      on sexual orientation and gender identity, violence and discrimination
      against members of  the  LGBT  community  were  serious  problems.  An
      activist reported that 72% of  the  LGBT  community  were  exposed  to
      verbal  intimidation  and  26%  sexual  violence  because   of   their
      sexuality. In the five years 2012-7 police data showed only  45  cases
      of hate crimes against LGBT persons were reported. Thus  the  majority
      of attacks were never resolved and perpetrators went unidentified  and
      unpunished, with NGOs claiming this resulted from a lack of  political
      will.

  35. 2017 ECRI reported that its reports are produced on a five year cycle,
      as an analysis of information  gathered  from  a  variety  of  written
      sources,  and  discussion  with  governmental  and  non   governmental
      sources, rather than by enquiry or testimony. The report  then  stated
      that since December 2010 progress has been made in a number of fields,
      having improved protection against hate crime by making  racist  trans
      or homophobic motivation an aggravating circumstance. Hate  speech  is
      explicitly criminalised. In 2012 a racist and homophobic  organisation
      was disbanded by the Constitutional Court. The High  Technology  Crime
      Department is reportedly increasingly focused on  cyber  hate  speech,
      and several police units have officers designated as  contact  persons
      for LGBT persons. Whilst these developments are welcomed,  ECRI  noted
      that some issues continued to give rise to concern.  Thus  police  are
      not always open to receiving LGBT complaints, and the  application  of
      the  legislation  against  hate  speech  and  violent  hate  crime  is
      inefficient, with no decisive action against the activities of  racist
      and  homophobic  hooligan  groups.  High  levels  of  homophobic   and
      transphobic violence regularly become visible at LGBT  pride  parades,
      and LGBT persons face high levels of prejudice, with security a  daily
      concern  for  them.  A  considerable  proportion  of   the   prevalent
      discrimination is committed by civil servants.

  36. 2018 EC reported Pride events taking place in both June and  September
      2017, without incidents, with the latter being attended by  the  Prime
      Minister   and   other   government   representatives    [28].    Anti
      discrimination training has been given to the police, and efforts  are
      ongoing to improve communication with the LGBT community. However  the
      situation reportedly remained difficult and activities in  the  action
      plan  for  the  national  anti-discrimination  strategy  were   behind
      schedule. There had been a slight increase in  violence  towards  LGBT
      persons. Investigation prosecution and penalties for attacks are often
      inadequate.  Centralised  official  data  on  hate  crimes  are  still
      lacking. Stronger  visible  political  commitment  to  promote  social
      inclusion and respect for the rights of LGBT persons was needed.

Conclusions

  37. In my judgement it is plain that the evidence presents a  rather  more
      nuanced picture than that offered by Dr Slootmaeckers, who appears  to
      have  adopted  more  of  the  role  of  advocate,  than  that  of  the
      independent and objective analyst. His evidence is not without  value,
      but I consider the reports referred to in paragraph 28 above are  more
      reliable, and more independently and objectively written.

  38. I am satisfied that the evidence as to conditions  within  Serbia  for
      the LGBT community up to  2014  is  consistent  with  the  Appellant's
      description of his own experiences. I do not understand the Respondent
      to argue to the contrary.

  39. Having reminded myself of their Lordships analysis in HJ (Iran) [2010]
      UKSC 31 I am satisfied that the physical harm the  Appellant  suffered
      in Serbia was of a nature that he could not reasonably be expected  to
      tolerate it, and as physical harm this went well  beyond  mere  social
      disapproval as a reaction to his sexuality. I contrast that  with  the
      position in relation to the discrimination he  says  he  suffered.  At
      interview he identified none directed to himself, later he  identified
      abuse passed to his sister, and thus to him indirectly. Only after the
      interview did he suggest he had experienced any direct  verbal  abuse,
      but gave no real details of this. He did not identify any occasions on
      which he had directly experienced homophobic discrimination.

  40. I accept the Appellant's unchallenged evidence that it was not open to
      him to seek to report a hate crime of the type that he suffered  to  a
      police station other than his local one. Thus  he  would  simply  have
      been referred back to his local police station if he had tried  to  do
      so.

  41.  The  Appellant's  own  evidence  does  not  demonstrate  a   complete
      unwillingness on the part of the officers staffing  his  local  police
      station to accept a report of a homophobic crime (since such a  report
      was accepted from  him  for  each  of  the  first  two  attacks).  The
      inability to identify his assailants in  relation  to  the  first  two
      attacks, begs the question of what investigation  was  conducted;  but
      there is no direct evidence to suggest that an investigation  was,  or
      was not, conducted. The Appellant has simply assumed there  was  none.
      The response to his attempt to report the third attack was, I  accept,
      quite different. That response indicated an unwillingness on the  part
      of the officers then present to accept the report, or, to  commit  any
      resource to its investigation, as a homophobic response.

  42. I am not satisfied that  conditions  outside  Belgrade  would  be  any
      better than those within Belgrade, and indeed the likelihood would  be
      that they would be worse as Dr Slootmaeckers  suggests.  The  evidence
      before me does not allow me to be satisfied that  his  opinion  is  in
      this respect at least, flawed. I am not satisfied  that  significantly
      less violence, and significantly less discrimination, takes  place  in
      rural Serbia in comparison to Belgrade; there is no evidence before me
      that would permit such a finding. Indeed experience would suggest that
      one could expect a migration of those who accepted their homosexuality
      from a rural to an urban environment.

  43. The three homophobic  attacks  experienced  by  the  Appellant  either
      inflicted serious harm, or, they constituted a real threat of  serious
      harm. The Appellant plainly has a subjectively well founded fear  that
      in the event of return to Serbia he would experience  further  attacks
      of this nature. The reliable objective evidence does  not  indicate  a
      significant improvement  in  the  threat  of  day  to  day  homophobic
      violence, since 2014, and so in my judgement the Appellant's  fear  is
      also objectively well founded. In so saying I accept that the position
      of those attending a Gay Pride event would  appear  to  have  improved
      very significantly since 2014, as a result of political  attention  to
      the event, and the resources committed to  the  policing  of  such  an
      event by the state. I contrast that with the evidence  concerning  day
      to day violence, away from such an event.

  44. I accept that homosexuality is not criminalised.  I  accept  that  not
      only are violent attacks criminal offences, but that if they are shown
      to be homophobically motivated, then the criminal law formally  treats
      that motivation as an aggravating feature to the  seriousness  of  the
      offence. I am satisfied therefore that a state  mechanism  does  exist
      for the detection, prosecution, and punishment of criminal offences in
      general, and homophobic violence in particular.

  45. I am satisfied that the appointment of Ms Brnabic  as  Prime  Minister
      has rather more significance than Dr Slootmaeckers suggests.  Such  an
      appointment would have been completely unacceptable to the electorate,
      to fellow politicians, and to the  leaders  of  the  Serbian  Orthodox
      Church if his opinions were entirely valid.

  46.  Whilst  steps  have  been  taken  to  improve  police  attitudes   to
      homosexuality by training police  officers,  and  appointing  to  some
      police stations LGBT liaison officers, the  evidence  as  analysed  by
      credible international observers does not yet demonstrate  that  there
      is a real willingness by the state to use the existing legislation  to
      real effect  to  seek  to  stamp  out  the  prevalence  of  homophobic
      violence. The figures  for  prosecutions  of  hate  crimes  speak  for
      themselves - they are plainly wholly inconsistent with the  levels  of
      day to day violence that these reports accept occur.

  47. I accept therefore that if one views the evidence in the round  it  is
      plain that attitudes within Serbia  are  changing,  and  changing  far
      faster than Dr Slootmaeckers has been prepared to acknowledge. On  the
      other hand I am not satisfied that the position has yet  been  reached
      in which I can  be  satisfied  that  adequate  state  protection  from
      homophobic violence is in reality afforded to an individual member  of
      the LGBT community; Horvath [2001] 1 AC 489.  For  the  reasons  given
      above I am not satisfied that internal relocation would avoid the risk
      faced by the Appellant upon return to Serbia.


  48. Accordingly having set aside Judge Oliver's decision upon  the  asylum
      and Article 3 appeal on 5 October 2017, I remake that decision  so  as
      to allow the appeal on  those  grounds.  Judge  Oliver's  decision  to
      dismiss the Article 8 appeal was however unchallenged, and as a result
      it was confirmed on 5 October 2017.





   DECISION


      The appeal is allowed on asylum and Article 3 grounds.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 31 May 2018

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

      Unless and until the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.  No  report   of   these
proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to  proceedings  being  brought  for  contempt  of
court.





   Signed





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 31 May 2018
