
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13700/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 November 2017                    |On 27 November 2017                 |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                     RS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bronwen Jones, Counsel instructed by A&P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  refusal  of  his
    protection claim.  The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction
    of the appellant, and  I  consider  that  it  is  appropriate  for  the
    direction to be maintained at these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Asylum Claim

 2. The appellant is a national of Sir Lanka, whose date of birth  is  [  ]
    1991.  He claimed asylum on 28 May  2016,  and  his  asylum  claim  was
    refused on 25 November 2016.

 3. As summarised in  the  refusal  letter,  his  claim  was  that  he  had
    voluntarily joined the LTTE in 2006 because all of his  relatives  were
    already in the LTTE.  He fought for the LTTE in uniform in  2007,  2008
    and 2009.  He rose through the ranks to become in charge of Vadamarachi
    East District, and he  had  49  fighters  under  him.   In  battle,  he
    sustained an injury to his leg when  a  shell  fell  on  him.   In  his
    screening interview, he said that this  incident  happened  on  7  July
    2007.  At the asylum interview, he said that this  had  happened  on  7
    February 2009, and he gave an alternative  cause  of  his  leg  injury,
    which was that he was hit by a sniper fire.

 4. In his screening interview, he said that he had been arrested in  2009.
    In his  asylum  interview,  he  said  he  had  been  arrested  for  his
    involvement in the LTTE by the CID in November 2015 and April 2016.  On
    the occasion of his first arrest, he was held for 5 days  at  Kodikaman
    Civil Camp.  Officers asked him about his involvement in the LTTE,  and
    he denied any involvement, stating that it was his brother who had been
    involved with the LTTE.  He was beaten, but he  suffered  no  injuries.
    As he had no previous involvement with the LTTE, he  was  released  but
    was required to report.  At the screening interview, he  said  that  he
    was required to report every  Sunday  at  8  o'clock.   In  his  asylum
    interview, he said that he was ordered to report on the fifth of  every
    month.

 5. In April 2016,  he  was  arrested  again  at  his  restaurant  by  army
    intelligence.  He recognised one of the arresting officers as  Rathees,
    with whom he had trained in the LTTE.  He was taken to Kodilkaman Civil
    Camp, where he was detained for a total of 6 days.  He was beaten,  and
    on this occasion sustained a blood  clot  on  his  chest.   His  father
    secured his release by paying a bribe.  He left Sri Lanka  on  his  own
    Sri Lankan passport and ID card.

 6. Within the last 2 months, army  intelligence  had  gone  to  his  house
    looking for him, and had arrested his brother.

The Reasons for Refusal

 7. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim to have been arrested and
    detained by army intelligence services in Sri Lanka,  due  to  internal
    inconsistencies in the account, and also because his account of  having
    exited the country  without  any  problems  directly  contradicted  his
    account of having escaped from detention, having  regard  to  objective
    information taken from a FCO letter dated 7 July 2014 on the  topic  of
    airport immigration control procedure.

 8. In any event, taking his claim at its highest, there was no  reason  to
    believe that he would be considered a threat to the  integrity  of  Sri
    Lanka as a single state because he had, or was  perceived  to  have,  a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.  On  his
    own case, he did not claim to have had any involvement  with  the  LTTE
    from 2009 (post-war) either in the UK or Sri  Lanka,  and  he  had  not
    taken  part  in  any  diaspora  activities  whatsoever   in   the   UK.
    Accordingly, it was not accepted that the Sir  Lankan  authorities  had
    any serious interest in him.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant's appeal came before Judge GA  Black  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 6 June 2017.   Both  parties  were  legally  represented.   Mr
    Muquit of Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant.

10. The Judge received oral evidence from the appellant, who said  that  he
    had attended rallies in the UK organised by the TGTE in  support  of  a
    Tamil state.   The Judge  also  received  evidence  from  a  supporting
    witness, Mr [S], who had been granted asylum.

11. The documentary evidence before the Judge included  a  scarring  report
    from Dr Martin, the thrust of which the Judge summarised  at  paragraph
    [13] of her subsequent decision.  The Judge set  out  her  findings  of
    fact and reasons at paragraphs [19] onwards.  The Judge  made  findings
    on the  evidence  of  the  appellant  (paragraphs  19-22),  the  expert
    evidence of Dr Martin (paragraph 23), the supporting evidence  from  Mr
    [S] (paragraph 24), and the Judge  reached  inter  alia  the  following
    conclusions in paragraphs [25] and  [26]:  the  account  given  by  the
    appellant  in  the  substantive  interview  had  been  exaggerated  and
    embellished to bolster his claim, particularly by stating that  he  was
    arrested  and  tortured  in  2016;   he   had   since   attended   TGTE
    demonstrations, but this was also an attempt to bolster his  claim  and
    to meet the concerns raised by the respondent in  the  refusal  letter;
    and there was no reliable evidence to show why the appellant would  not
    have come to the attention of the authorities between 2009 and 2016  if
    he was someone of interest to them.

12. At paragraph [27], the Judge made the following findings of fact:

          a) the appellant was a Tamil who may have  had  some  involvement
             with the LTTE many years ago  and  his  activities  ceased  in
             2009;

          b)  the appellant was not a high-ranking or active member of  the
             LTTE;

          c) the appellant was not arrested, detained,  or  ill-treated  in
             2016;

          d) the appellant was not a person, nor would he be perceived as a
             person, with any significant role in relation to post-conflict
             Tamil separatism;

          e) the appellant had scars on his left thigh, which may have been
             caused by high-velocity fragments/projectile or by a blow from
             a blunt instrument, or by accidental injury or infection.

13. At paragraph [28], the Judge held that even if the  appellant  had  had
    some LTTE history and had been injured during the conflict,  she  could
    find no reliable evidence that he was  a  high-profile  member  of  the
    LTTE, or that he continued to be involved in the LTTE and was committed
    to pursuing its aims to de-stabilise the current Government.  She found
    no credible evidence of any recent adverse interest  in  him,  and  she
    found that he was not arrested and ill-treated in  2016,  and  that  he
    would not be suspected of working for Tamil separatism.

14. The Judge concluded at paragraph [29] that the appellant had failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof that he faced a real risk of  persecution
    or ill-treatment on return to Sri Lanka.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

15. Charlotte Bayati of Counsel settled  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In  Paragraphs  5-10,  she
    advanced six grounds of appeal, three  of  which  related  to  asserted
    factual errors made by the Judge. Of the remainder, Ground 1 (Paragraph
    5) was that the Judge had accepted that the appellant was a  vulnerable
    witness,  but  had  failed  to  take  this   account   when   assessing
    credibility; Ground 2 (Paragraph 6)  was  that  her  finding  that  the
    appellant  had  lied  in  his  screening   interview   was   Wednesbury
    unreasonable; and Ground 5 (Paragraph 9) was that  she  had  failed  to
    take proper account Dr Martin's scarring report.

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission

16. On 14 July 2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  refused
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "The Judge has considered all the evidence, including  the  medical
         report, and has made appropriate findings which were open to her to
         make, including also having had the benefit of oral evidence on the
         day of the hearing.  It was open to  the  Judge  to  consider  what
         weight she felt it appropriate to place on all the evidence  before
         her.   Even  if  there  were  factual  inconsistencies,  they   are
         immaterial  as  the  Judge  has  given  adequate  reasons  for  her
         decision."

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission

17. On 12 September 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  granted  permission
    as follows:

         "1.  I give permission  on  each  ground,  but  I  am  particularly
             concerned  by  ground  9  which  contends   that   the   Judge
             undervalued the medical evidence.

         2.   The appellant is reminded that he must show that any error  is
             material.   Past  problems  with  the   authorities   do   not
             necessarily equate with there being a present risk."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out,  Ms  Jones  developed  the  arguments  advanced  in  the   renewed
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  behalf
    of the Secretary of State, Ms Pal adhered to  the  Rule  24  respondent
    opposing the appeal which had  been  settled  by  a  colleague  in  the
    Specialist Appeals Team, and which adopted similar  reasoning  to  that
    contained in the First-tier Tribunal's refusal of permission to appeal.

Discussion

19. It is convenient to deal first with  the  ground  which  most  troubled
    Judge Perkins, which was that advanced in paragraph 9 with  respect  to
    the Judge's treatment of the expert evidence of Dr Martin.

Ground 5 (Paragraph 9)

20. As previously noted, the Judge summarised the  thrust  of  Dr  Martin's
    report at paragraph [13] of her decision.  It is not suggested that her
    summary of his findings  is  inaccurate.   Dr  Martin  found  that  the
    appellant  had  one  scar  to  his  head,  which  was  consistent  with
    deliberate assault (attributed to a gun butt assault in 2016); or which
    could have been caused by accidental injury or a self-inflicted injury.
     He opined that two scars (scars 5 and 6) were typical of injury from a
    high-velocity projectile, and three further scars (scars 3,  4  and  7)
    were consistent with injuries caused by shrapnel from a  shell-bomb  in
    2009.  He considered other causes, including that it was possible  that
    the injuries could have been caused by another injury by a  firearm  or
    by high-velocity fragment in the explosion during the Sri Lankan  armed
    conflict, but were unlikely  to  have  been  caused  accidentally.   He
    opined that the  appearance  of  all  the  scars  was  consistent  with
    injuries being more than two years old.

21. At  paragraph  [23],  the  Judge  held  that  Dr  Martin's  conclusions
    potentially  corroborated  the  appellant's  account,   but   she   had
    considered them within the sum of  the  evidence.  She  held  that  the
    appellant had scars which were consistent with them being sustained  in
    battle from gun-shot and shrapnel, but it was also  possible  that  the
    injuries had occurred within  the  Sri  Lankan  conflict  "not  on  the
    battlefield as a combatant".  The scar to the head was consistent  with
    injury by gun butt, but - the Judge observed - Dr Martin also  accepted
    that it could have been caused from a fall  or  fight.   The  appellant
    stated that he was hit in the  chest  with  a  gun  butt,  whereas  the
    scarring report attributed them to a beating.  The report referred to a
    gun butt injury to the head, whereas the appellant spoke  of  scars  to
    his head from shrapnel: "These inconsistencies led me to have doubts as
    to the credibility of the claim."

22. The complaint in paragraph 9 is that the Judge misdirected  herself  in
    paragraph [23] when discussing scars 5 and 6.  It is  argued  that  she
    failed to take into account that Dr Martin opined that scars  5  and  6
    were typical of an injury caused  by  trauma  due  to  a  high-velocity
    projectile.

23. This complaint has no merit.   The  Judge  earlier  correctly  directed
    herself as to Dr Martin's finding on the causation of scars  5  and  6.
    At paragraph [23], she was addressing a  different  point,  namely  the
    circumstances in which scars 5 and 6 had been inflicted.  It  was  open
    to her to find, by reference to Dr Martin's  report,  that  they  could
    have been inflicted on the appellant as a civilian, rather  than  as  a
    combatant on the battlefield. Dr Martin did not opine  that  the  scars
    were more likely to have been caused by a bullet from  a  firearm  than
    they were by a high velocity fragment from an  exploding  shell.   Both
    mechanisms of injury were equally likely, according to his report.

Ground 1 (Paragraph 5)

24. The complaint in paragraph 5 is that, having found the appellant to  be
    a vulnerable witness, the Judge failed to take this into  account  when
    assessing  credibility.    She   failed   to   consider   whether   the
    discrepancies in his account may have been because he was a  vulnerable
    witness.

25. This ground of appeal is based upon a false factual premise.  The Judge
    did not accept that the appellant was a vulnerable witness.  She  noted
    an argument by Mr Muquit that the appellant  should  be  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness.  But she did not make  a  finding  that  he  was  a
    vulnerable witness.

26. Having reviewed the documents, I note  that  Mr  Muquit  advanced  this
    submission in his skeleton argument, but he does  not  appear  to  have
    advanced it when opening the case.   The  first  line  of  the  Judge's
    record of proceedings states that the appellant was well  and  able  to
    give evidence. Mr Muquit also confirmed  to  her  that  there  were  no
    Article 3 medical issues.

27. Not only was there no medical evidence before the Judge to suggest that
    the appellant was suffering  from  PTSD  or  any  other  mental  health
    condition which might have impaired his memory, the  appellant  himself
    did not claim in his witness statement that the inconsistencies in  his
    account relied upon in the refusal  letter  were  attributable  to  him
    being a vulnerable witness.

28. In the circumstances, the Judge did not err in  law  in  not  expressly
    asking herself the question whether the discrepancies  in  his  account
    were attributable to him being a vulnerable witness.

Ground 2 (Paragraph 6)

29. The complaint in paragraph 6 is that the Judge's finding  at  paragraph
    [19] that the appellant had lied at his screening interview  -  in  his
    failure to mention or refer to the LTTE - was Wednesbury unreasonable.

30. Again, the complaint is based upon a  false  factual  premise.   It  is
    wrongly assumed that the Judge made this finding simply on the basis of
    comparing what the appellant said in his screening interview with  what
    the appellant said in his substantive asylum interview.  In  fact,  the
    Judge's record of proceedings shows that  the  finding  is  based  upon
    evidence that was  elicited  from  the  appellant  by  his  Counsel  in
    examination in chief.

31. In response to questions from his Counsel,  the  appellant  volunteered
    that he did not tell the truth in the  screening  interview.   He  told
    them he was not with the LTTE, even though he was.  His explanation for
    lying about not being with the LTTE was that he did not know what would
    happen to him if he said he was with the LTTE.





Ground 3 (Paragraph 7)

32. The complaint in paragraph 7 is that the Judge made a factual error  in
    paragraph  [19],  in  stating  that  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    membership of the LTTE was not a consistent  account.   It  is  pleaded
    that the appellant made it clear that he had joined the LTTE  in  2006,
    but he did not start fighting until 2008, as he was too young to  fight
    in 2007.

33. This complaint has no merit, as  the  appellant  initially  represented
    that he began fighting for the LTTE in 2006, which  is  not  consistent
    with the background evidence that the LTTE had a policy  whereby  those
    under the age  of  17  were  not  involved  in  fighting.   After  this
    inconsistency had been identified in the refusal letter, the  appellant
    changed his evidence.  The Judge was not thereby de-barred from  making
    an adverse credibility finding on the basis of what the  appellant  had
    originally said.

Ground 4 (Paragraph 8)

34. The complaint in paragraph 8 is  that  the  Judge  did  not  take  into
    account  the  appellant's  evidence  that  there  had  been  no   major
    demonstrations between the time of his arrival in the UK and  the  time
    of his interview, but that he had since had the time to become involved
    in diaspora activity.   I consider that this is an egregious example of
    a mere expression of disagreement with a  finding  of  fact  which  was
    clearly open to the Judge.

35. At paragraph [26] of her decision, the Judge held as follows:

         "Whilst I accept that the appellant has been shown  in  photographs
         attending a TGTE rally in London, I find that this evidence  failed
         to show that he was an activist and  supporter  of  the  TGTE.   In
         evidence, he was unable  to  state  what  the  words  were  on  the
         placards he was holding, which suggests that he was not  an  active
         supporter of the cause.  I find no reliable evidence for the  claim
         that the appellant's activities, which  would  at  most  amount  to
         attendance at one or two rallies, would come to  the  attention  of
         the authorities."

36. In the light of what the Judge has said  at  paragraph  [26],  she  has
    plainly given adequate reasons for finding that his attendance at  TGTE
    demonstrations since the asylum interview were an  attempt  to  bolster
    his asylum claim, and that he was not in  fact  a  genuine  and  active
    supporter of the TGTE cause; and, in any event,  his  limited  diaspora
    activities were not  such  as  to  have  brought  him  to  the  adverse
    attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.

Ground 6 (Paragraph 10)

37. The complaint in paragraph 10 is that the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    supporting evidence of Mr  [S]  was  fundamentally  flawed.   This  was
    because she said that he had no first-hand knowledge of the appellant's
    involvement with the LTTE, but this was factually incorrect.

38. The Judge's finding at paragraph [24] was as follows:

         "I place  little  weight  on  the  evidence  from  the  appellant's
         witness.  The evidence given was in the main information from other
         sources and the witness had no direct knowledge of the  appellant's
         involvement in the LTTE or of his arrest.  I  accept  the  evidence
         that the appellant was wounded and that the witness took his family
         to visit him, but considered in the round this does not corroborate
         his claim as there may have been other circumstances in  which  the
         appellant was injured."

39. The grounds of appeal cross-refer to paragraph 5 of  Mr  [S]'s  witness
    statement where he said as follows: "I first was [S]  after  he  joined
    the LTTE was in April 2009 when I took his mother and sister to him  as
    he was severely injured and his mother was informed by the LTTE to take
    care of him."

40.  Mr  [S]  thus  only  claimed  to  have  first-hand  knowledge  of  the
    appellant's involvement in the LTTE in the  circumstances  set  out  in
    paragraph 5 of his witness statement.  The Judge accepted  this  aspect
    of his account.  The legitimate point that she made in  paragraph  [23]
    was that he did not have first-hand knowledge of the  circumstances  in
    which he had sustained his injury, namely whether it had been sustained
    as an LTTE combatant  or  as  a  civilian.   Accordingly,  the  Judge's
    treatment of Mr [S]'s evidence does not  disclose  a  factual  error  -
    still less an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date  24 November 2017


Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge






