
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13152/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision promulgated         |
|on 8 November 2017                            |on 10 November 2017          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Singer instructed by Hamlet Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Juss who dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection  and  human
        rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh who claims to  have  been
        born on [ ] 1985 and who  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  22
        November 2007 as a Working  Holidaymaker  with  leave  valid  to  6
        November 2009.  On 30 May 2014, the appellant applied for Leave  to
        Remain on family/private life grounds as he  claimed  to  be  in  a
        relationship with a British national female in the UK although this
        application was  rejected  on  18  September  2009.  The  appellant
        claimed asylum on 17 May 2016. His claim was refused on 15 November
        2016 against which the appellant appealed.
     3. Having considered the evidence the Judge sets out his  findings  of
        fact from [14]  of  the  decision  under  challenge  which  can  be
        summarised in the following terms:


                  a. With the  application  for  asylum  made  in  2016  the
                     appellant submitted an FIR which was verified as  being
                     fraudulent by the  British  High  Commission  in  Dhaka
                     [14].
                  b. The evidence submitted by the appellant in the form  of
                     DVD recordings needs to be seen in light of his  having
                     previously submitted fraudulent evidence. The Secretary
                     of State rightly rejected (1) appellant's membership of
                     the BNP  in  Bangladesh,  (2)  political  incidents  in
                     Bangladesh in 2004 2007 and (3) BNP activities  in  the
                     UK. The appellant has been unable to  confirm  that  he
                     was ever listed as a named speaker to speak  at  a  BNP
                     event, and initially claimed he had not, there  was  no
                     one  before  the  Tribunal  from  BNP  to  support  the
                     appellant's claim as  the  appellant  claimed  he  felt
                     unable to ask anyone [15].
                  c. The appellant will not be at risk of  ill-treatment  in
                     Bangladesh  because  he  attended  on  behalf  of   the
                     cultural wing of the BNP.  Even  though  the  appellant
                     claims some of the footage would  have  been  shown  on
                     Bangladeshi channels there was no evidence that the few
                     minutes or seconds in which he  is  appearing  will  be
                     shown to be picked up by the authorities.  Even  if  it
                     was the fact is the appellant  is  of  no  interest  to
                     anyone there. The evidence the appellant has  contrived
                     to  great  lengths  to  submitted  fraudulent  evidence
                     designed only to secure him asylum  status  in  the  UK
                     [16].
                  d. The appellant's activities in Bangladesh  were  rightly
                     found to be lacking in  credibility  because  of  their
                     striking vagueness. The appellant failed to explain why
                     is at risk first life for  the  BNP  if  he  had  scant
                     knowledge of its policies.  The  appellant  claimed  to
                     have no interest in named policies. It was not credible
                     he had been an active member of the BNP since  2001  or
                     that the political incidents  of  2004  and  2007  took
                     place.  The  appellant  did  not  report  the   alleged
                     incidents to the police and there is no case assert  of
                     international surrogate protection that  the  appellant
                     has been able to make out [17].
                  e. The Judge finds that even if the appellant's  story  is
                     true, which the primary finding is that it is  not,  it
                     was open to  him  to  enlist  the  help  of  the  state
                     authorities if he requires protection [17].
                  f. The appellant had not satisfied the Judge  of  a  well-
                     founded fear of persecution or  right  to  qualify  for
                     humanitarian protection [18]. The appellant had  failed
                     to establish his claim engaged article 3 ECHR [19].
                  g. The Judge did not accept the appellant is  entitled  to
                     succeed  on  human  rights  grounds  as  he   had   not
                     established an ability to satisfy the Rules, there  was
                     no basis for concluding exceptional circumstances exist
                     such that it should be granted discretionary leave, the
                     Judge adopts the reasoning in the refusal letter [20].


     4. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal but granted on a renewed  application  by  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge Kekic on 8 September 2017. The operative part  of  the  grant
        being in the following terms:


             It is  arguable  that  given  the  numerous  mistakes  in  the
             determination, highlighted in the grounds, that the judge  did
             not give anxious scrutiny to the case before him. Reference to
             the wrong country, the  wrong  language,  the  wrong  date  of
             application and the misspelling of the appellant's name do not
             inspire confidence in the determination and the judge's  brief
             assessment of the claim, including the  appellant's  sur  plas
             activities, is arguably inadequate.


             Further,  it  is  arguable  that  the  judge   commenced   his
             assessment of the evidence with s.8  matters  and  that  this,
             when combined  with  the  factual  errors  highlighted  above,
             renders the findings unsafe.



Error of law


     5. The alleged mistakes in the determination  include  (i)  the  Judge
        misspelling the name of  the  appellant  as  Mohammad  rather  than
        Muhammad (ii) wrongly recording the  interpreter  as  being  Arabic
        when in fact  he  was  Bengali,  (iii)  at  [1]  referring  to  the
        appellant being proposed to be removed to Libya when it  should  be
        Bangladesh, (iv) at [2] wrongly referring to the  application  made
        on 30 May 2014 as being refused on 18 September 2009 when it should
        have been 2014. Whilst it is preferable for there to be  no  errors
        in a decision of any judicial body the reality  is  that  at  times
        errors do occur. The correct spelling of the appellant's first name
        appears throughout the First-tier Tribunal file in all  places  bar
        the header of the Judge's decision. The Judge was clearly aware  of
        the appellant's name and identity, the issue being the substitution
        of  the  letter  'u'  with  the  letter  'o'.  This  is  clearly  a
        typographical error. In relation to the interpreter the  Judge  was
        clearly aware of the language being used during the course  of  the
        hearing and both a reference to the interpreter  being  Arabic  and
        the place of return  to  Libya  are  clearly  typographical  errors
        arising as a result of  a  lack  of  anxious  scrutiny  when  proof
        reading the determination. The Judge refers  in  the  body  of  the
        determination to the appellant being a Bengali speaker and  to  the
        appellant's true nationality - see [2] and [6]. The reference to 18
        September 2009 is, again, clearly a typographical error and lack of
        checking in the final decision as it would be physically impossible
        for an application made on 30 May 2014  to  have  been  refused  in
        2009. In any event, the decision under challenge before  the  Judge
        is the refusal of 15 November 2016. In relation to these issues  no
        arguable legal error arises either individually or in support of an
        assertion that they demonstrate  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny when considering the evidence.
     6. A more serious assertion raised by Mr Singer is that the Judge  had
        failed to consider the evidence with the required degree of anxious
        scrutiny or given adequate reasons for the findings made generally.
        This allegation is coupled with the allegation at Ground 2  of  the
        renewed grounds that the Judge took section 8 of the 2004 Act as  a
        starting point for the assessment of  the  appellant's  credibility
        and, at Ground 3, that the Judge failed to  properly  consider  the
        appellant's sur place claim.
     7. The Judge is criticised for placing  too  much  reliance  upon  the
        respondent's reasons for refusal letter when it is argued there was
        a considerable amount of evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  in
        support of his  claim  that  the  Judge  failed  to  adequately  or
        properly examine. It is argued the Judge  did  not  deal  with  the
        interview, medical evidence, evidence of past persecution regarding
        the  Awami  League,  evidence  from  Bangladesh,  and   substantial
        photographic and electronic evidence  relating  to  the  sur  place
        activities. Mr Singer submitted there was no assessment of the oral
        evidence, photographic evidence, or points raised in submissions.
     8. To ascertain whether there is any merit in  the  challenge  to  the
        decision one needs to consider  the  determination  carefully.  The
        Judge had before him the evidence relied upon by both parties.  The
        Judge clearly understood the appellant's immigration  history  for,
        bar the incorrect date, there  is  no  criticism  of  the  analysis
        referred to, for example, at [2] of the decision under challenge.
     9. The core elements of the case were set out by the Judge at  [2]  to
        [6], paragraphs [3-6] of which are in the following terms:


             3.   The reasons why the Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's
                  application are set out in  the  letter  of  refusal.  The
                  Respondent observes that the  Appellant's  fear  is  based
                  upon mistreatment on account of his political  opinion  as
                  he became politically involved with the BNP and fears  the
                  governing Awami  League  Party  in  Bangladesh.  Extensive
                  reliance is placed on his sur place activities in the  UK.
                  It is unnecessary to me to set out the Refusal  letter  in
                  detail. Suffice it to say that I have had full  regard  to
                  it.


             4.   In his Witness Statement ('WS') dated  25  January  2017,
                  (at pages 5 to 15), which he adopted at the Hearing before
                  me  together  with  his   original   WS,   the   appellant
                  strenuously repeats his claim in  answer  to  the  refusal
                  letter, namely, for example, that the chairperson  of  the
                  BNP, Khaleda Zia, was arrested  (para.  4);  that  he  was
                  himself a president of his college hostel  branch  of  the
                  BNP (para 5); but that it was the case that "the SSHD  had
                  failed to make a proper assessment of the  BNP...."  (para
                  7). Apart from  an  ever  more  strenuous  assertion  than
                  before, as to the credibility of his claim, this  extended
                  witness statement does not  add  much  more  to  what  the
                  Appellants had previously described as his claim.


             5.   In his examination-in-chief by Mr Singer,  the  Appellant
                  drew attention to a number  of  coloured  photographs,  as
                  well as an 11 March 2015 Law Society Lecture Democracy and
                  Human  rights  in  Bangladesh,  although   the   Appellant
                  accepted he did not speak at this event but just attended.
                  Simon Danczuk MP, he confirmed as speaking  from  16.05  -
                  16.45. He also referred to a DVD, but  I  noted  that  the
                  Appellant was only sitting there and not interviewed,  and
                  is part of  the  audience.  He  explained  here  that  his
                  presence  nevertheless  resulted  in  his  being  put   on
                  Bangladeshi Channels. I noted that in these he was clearly
                  not in the front row but right at the  back.  However,  he
                  asserted this footage was nevertheless widely available on
                  the internet in all countries. He confirmed to me  when  I
                  asked that in none of those videos is he himself giving  a
                  Speech. Of the many DVDs, there was at DVD  1  (at  p.173)
                  the Anniversary Cake is cut for Bangladesh. There  was  at
                  DVD 2 (at p.174)  people  being  assaulted  in  Bangladesh
                  (although this was not shown  to  me  on  his  Barrister's
                  Laptop). There was at DVD 3 the address given  by  Khalida
                  Zia of the BNP in London at a meeting and at 1 min  and  4
                  seconds the appellant becomes  visible  in  this  footage.
                  However, I noted that he was not even on the  podium  with
                  Khalida Zia. He is  simply  one  amongst  a  multitude  in
                  attendance.


             5.   It is, however, DVD 4 is (p.176) which actually shows the
                  appellant speaking into a microphone  in  English  with  a
                  crowd of demonstrators at a  protest  in  London.  As  the
                  Appellant explained, this event took place on 17 June 2015
                  at the Hilton on Park Lane because Shiekh Haseena (of  the
                  opposition Awami  League  Party,  which  is  currently  in
                  power) was at the hotel. He was in English denouncing  the
                  illegal party. I noted, however, that he was wearing large
                  black tinted sunglasses (as were the others alongside him)
                  and this was no doubt intended to make  identification  of
                  these demonstrators difficult. On  another  occasion,  the
                  Appellant is shown speaking again in an address  given  in
                  Bengali, and this appears at [at p.181 there is an English
                  translation). There is also a second DVD of only 2 mins or
                  so, where he is again shown addressing, what appears to be
                  cinema  hall  crowd.  Various  other  videos   were   also
                  highlighted. For example, at DVD 4 (File  A)  there  is  a
                  proper meeting (translated into English at  P.178),  which
                  the Appellant explained was in 2014. This  was  a  meeting
                  addressing the plight of those who had been  kidnapped  in
                  Bangladesh by the security forces, but for whom  no  voice
                  was  being  raised.  At  DVD  4  (File  D)  the  Appellant
                  explained that he was being seen again at and 4 mins  into
                  the footage, although he is not here making a  speech.  At
                  DVD 5 (P.177) here shown to be at 10 Downing  Street,  and
                  this is most recently in January 2017, where together with
                  others he goes in, as he claimed to  hand  in  a  Petition
                  against  the  Bangladeshi  government.  Apart   from   the
                  Appellant highlighting this evidence, no  other  questions
                  were asked by Mr Singer of the Appellant.


    10. At [7] the Judge sets out  in  what  appears  almost  verbatim  the
        questions and answers given and received in  cross-examination  and
        notes there was no re-examination by Mr Singer.
    11. At [9 - 11] the Judge sets out the closing speeches  made  by  both
        representatives. It is not suggested before the Upper Tribunal that
        the Judge misunderstood the thrust of the legal arguments.
    12. The assertion by Mr Singer that the Judge failed  to  consider  the
        evidence with the required degree of anxious scrutiny is  not  made
        out. The Judge was clearly aware of the  material  provided  and  a
        reading the determination fails to establish the Judge  then  chose
        to ignore or pay no attention  to  it.  It  is  noted  Mr  Singer's
        challenge appears to be predicated on the basis the Judge fails  to
        make detailed reference to the substantial volume of  material  the
        appellant provided. It is not legal error for a judge  not  to  set
        out chapter and verse in relation to the evidence provided  or  all
        his or her thoughts upon the same.  A requirement to  do  so  would
        end up in decision substantially longer than those that are already
        produced. The question to be addressed is whether a reading of  the
        decision under challenge supports a  finding  that  that  material,
        even if not mentioned to the extent Mr Singer submitted  it  should
        have been, was properly considered.  I  find  the  answer  to  this
        question is in the affirmative and that no arguable legal error  is
        established on this basis.
    13.  The  assertion  the  Judge  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons
        necessitates my setting out the findings made at [12 - 20]  of  the
        decision under challenge. A summary of those  finding  is  set  out
        above, but in light of the specific nature of the challenge  before
        the Upper Tribunal a more detailed account is required.
    14. Those findings are in the following terms:


             12.   The  law  relating  to  refugee  protection  claims   is
                  contained  in  the  Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC)
                  which has been transposed into the law of the  UK  through
                  party 11 of the Immigration Rules  and  the  Qualification
                  Regulations 2006.  The  burden  of  proof  lies  upon  the
                  Appellant the standard of proof is usually described as  a
                  low standard, being assessed according to "real  risk"  or
                  "reasonable likelihood".


             13.  I have given careful consideration to all the documentary
                  evidence and to the oral  evidence  before  me.  I  remind
                  myself that, "the real question, as always in these cases,
                  was, notwithstanding that which had happened .. Whether it
                  be safe for this Appellant to return"  (see  Lord  Justice
                  Moses in AM (Pakistan) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  1064  (at
                  paragraph 18). I do not find that the Appellant  satisfies
                  the requirements of paragraph 329L and that  his  evidence
                  is not coherent implausible for the following reasons.


             14.  This is a case where the Appellant, who arrived in the UK
                  on a working holiday maker visa entered on his  own  valid
                  passport and visa. He then tried to  get  further  LTR  on
                  family/private life grounds on the basis of a relationship
                  with a British girl. It was only when the application  was
                  rejected in 2014 that he applied for asylum. Even then  he
                  did not do so for two years to 2016. When  he  did  so  he
                  submitted an FIR which was verified as being fraudulent by
                  the BHC in Dhaka.


             15.  The evidence that he has today submitted in the  form  of
                  DVD recordings needs to be seen in the light of his having
                  previously submitted fraudulent evidence (see  the  RL  at
                  paras 35-40). I find that the SSHD  has  rightly  rejected
                  the following: (i) Membership of the  BNP  in  Bangladesh;
                  (ii) Political incidents in Bangladesh in 2004  and  2007;
                  and (iii) BNP activity in the UK. The Appellant  has  gone
                  to considerable lengths to produce DVD footage  today  but
                  he was unable to confirm that he  was  ever  listed  as  a
                  named Speaker to speak at the BMP events (and in  fact  at
                  first had said he was not) and it is a fact that there was
                  no one here today from BNP to  support  him  quite  simply
                  because the Appellant felt unable to ask anyone.


             16.  I find that the Appellant will not be at risk of any ill-
                  treatment in Bangladesh because he has attended on  behalf
                  of the cultural wing of the  BNP.  Moreover,  although  he
                  says that some of this footage will  have  been  shown  on
                  Bangladeshi channels there is no  evidence  that  the  few
                  minutes or seconds that he is appearing will be  shown  or
                  picked up by the authorities there. Even if  it  was,  the
                  plain fact is that he is  of  no  interest  whatsoever  to
                  anyone there. The evidence that he has contrived at  great
                  lengths to submit  is  fraudulent  and  designed  only  to
                  secure him asylum status in the UK.


             17.  His activities in Bangladesh were  rightly  found  to  be
                  lacking in credibility because of their striking vagueness
                  (RL at paras 12-14) and the Appellant singularly failed to
                  explain why he was risking his life for the BNP if he  had
                  scant knowledge its policies (RL at para 15). In fact, the
                  Appellant even remarkably said that he had no interest  in
                  named policies (RL at para 16). It is not credible that he
                  had been an active member of the BNP  since  2001  (RL  at
                  para 22) or that the political incidents of 2004 and  2007
                  took place (RL at para 24) and it is clear that  there  is
                  no case for international surrogate  protection  that  the
                  appellant has been able to make  out.  In  short,  if  his
                  story is true (which I hold it is not) it is open  to  him
                  to first enlist the help of his state authorities.


             18.   Having found that the Appellant is not a refugee because
                  he has not established a well-founded fear of persecution,
                  by analogy, I find that the Appellant cannot  qualify  for
                  humanitarian protection either.


             19.  As I have found that the Appellant has not established  a
                  well-founded fear of persecution, by analogy, I also  find
                  that his claim does not engage  Article  3  of  the  Human
                  Rights Convention either.


             20.  As for the Appellant's article 8 rights, he has no  claim
                  that can succeed under paragraph 276ADE  and  Appendix  FM
                  and there is no basis  for  his  showing  that  there  are
                  exceptional circumstances such that he should  be  granted
                  discretionary leave to remain. I adopt the reasons set out
                  in the refusal letter.


    15. The criticism that the Judge has done no more than  rubberstamp  or
        repeat the content of the reasons for refusal letter  is  not  made
        out. It is accepted that for a judge  to  do  so  might  amount  to
        arguable legal error but this is not  what  has  occurred  in  this
        case. The Judge clearly considered all the evidence made  available
        and the findings made clearly mirror not only the  Judge's  opinion
        but the position set out in the Reasons for  Refusal  letter  which
        represents the Secretary of States position  in  relation  to  this
        appeal. As Mr Bates submitted, it would always be open to the Judge
        to set out verbatim exactly what is written in the  Refusal  letter
        in the Judges own terms but that was arguably  not  necessary.  The
        conclusions arising from the evidence  reflected  in  [11]  are  in
        accordance with the material from which such findings originate.
    16. In relation to the FIR, Mr Singer submitted  the  Judge  failed  to
        take into account the appellant's explanation in  his  evidence  in
        relation to this document. I find no arguable merit in  this  claim
        which is, in effect, a challenge to the weight the  Judge  gave  to
        the evidence in relation to this aspect of the appeal. I  find  the
        Judge considered the evidence with the required degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny. It is not disputed that the  FIR  has  been  verified  as
        being fraudulent by the British High Commission. Although Mr Singer
        sought to argue in the alternative it has not  been  made  out  the
        conclusion regarding the credibility of that document is in any way
        flawed nor the extent to which the Judge was reasonably  unable  to
        place any weight upon it.
    17. In relation to the sur place  activities,  the  Judge  was  clearly
        aware  of  these  and  refers  in  the  above  paragraphs  to   the
        photographic  and  other  electronic  evidence  submitted  by   the
        appellant. The analysis of that evidence set out at [4 - 6] has not
        been shown to be infected  by  arguable  legal  error.  Whilst  the
        appellant sought to argue he has a profile that will place  him  at
        real risk on return, this was clearly not found to have  been  made
        out by the Judge on the basis of the  material  provided.   It  was
        submitted by Mr Bates that the burden of proving an entitlement  to
        international protection lies upon the person so  asserting  which,
        in this case, is the appellant.
    18. The material before the Judge failed to establish any arguable real
        risk arising from  the  activities  undertaken  by  the  appellant,
        recorded by the Judge, such as to create a real risk on  return  to
        Bangladesh.
    19. The Judge also notes, in the alternative, at [17] that even if  the
        appellant's account was true he has  a  sufficiency  of  protection
        from the  authorities  in  Bangladesh.  This  is  not  specifically
        challenged before the Tribunal to the extent that it can  be  found
        this is an arguably perverse or irrational finding.
    20. Mr Singer's submissions inferring that the sheer volume of material
        provided by the applicant should have led the Judge  to  allow  the
        appeal has no arguable merit. It is the  quality  of  the  evidence
        provided from all sources and the interpretation of the  same  that
        leads a judge to consider the weight that can be attached  to  that
        material.  That is the important factor, not sheer volume alone. As
        I have found  the  Judge  has  considered  the  evidence  with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny and I find has  given  adequate
        reasons to support the findings made, the weight to be given to the
        evidence was a matter for the Judge.
    21. Although Mr Singer referred to the  fact  that  if  arguable  legal
        error is found and the matter considered further the appellant  has
        additional evidence to adduce, this was  not  material  before  the
        Judge.  If warranted, as a result of post-decision material, it  is
        always open to the appellant to make a fresh  claim  which  can  be
        considered by the decision-maker pursuant to paragraph 353  of  the
        Immigration Rules.
    22. Having considered the matter with the required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny I find that the appellant has failed to make out that  the
        Judge has erred in law in a manner  material  to  the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal.


Decision

    23. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    24. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 9 November 2017
