
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13939/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 18 January 2018                   |On 19 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     SH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Warren, Counsel
For the respondent:     Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


      1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to his asylum claim.




      2. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal dated 30 January 2018 dismissing his appeal on  protection
         and human rights grounds.





Summary of asylum claim and immigration history



      3. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq,  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   He
         resided with his family in Bashiqa until 2014 when  Daesh  occupied
         his home area.  He then moved to Erbil in  the  Kurdish  Autonomous
         Area ('KAA').  He claims that in 2015 he commenced  a  relationship
         with a woman and was discovered  by  her  aunt  engaged  in  sexual
         foreplay.  I shall refer to the woman as W in this  decision.   The
         appellant's claims that W committed suicide  and  her  family  seek
         retribution for bring shame and 'dishonour' on them.





First-tier Tribunal decision



      4. The First-tier Tribunal  accepted  that  the  appellant  came  from
         Bashiqa and was at risk from Daesh there and was  therefore  forced
         to leave for Erbil.  Given the acceptance that the appellant is  at
         risk in Bashiqa, the First-tier Tribunal focussed its attention  on
         the appellant's claim that he is at risk in the KAA because of what
         happened with W and her family's reaction to this.




      5. The First-tier Tribunal acknowledged that the appellant's  evidence
         was broadly consistent at [30] to [31] and accepted at [33] to [34]
         that honour killings as described by the appellant  take  place  in
         Iraq, particularly in Erbil.  The First-tier Tribunal rejected  the
         appellant's account of his claimed  relationship  with  W.   In  so
         doing, the First-tier  Tribunal  focused  almost  entirely  on  the
         plausibility of this account.  In summary, the First-tier  Tribunal
         did not regard it to be credible that a 20-year old  Sunni-  Muslim
         woman, the daughter of  a  KDP  captain,  would  risk  meeting  the
         appellant in private on three occasions and would engage in  sexual
         foreplay with him within such a short period of time.




      6. The only other discernible adverse credibility finding concerns the
         appellant's failure to claim asylum in European countries en  route
         to the UK.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  regarded  the  appellant's
         failure to claim asylum in Austria and France as  damaging  to  his
         credibility at [35].




      7.  In  a  decision  dated  17  May  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Nightingale granted permission  to  appeal  observing  that  it  is
         arguable that the First-tier Tribunal "fell into error  by  failing
         to give adequate reasons for finding the  account  implausible  and
         rejecting the claim in full on the lower standard."





Hearing



      8. Ms Warren relied upon what she described as the 'Robinson  obvious'
         error of law identified by Judge  Nightingale.  She  described  the
         reasons provided for regarding the appellant's account  to  not  be
         credible as inadequate.   She  reminded  me  that  honour  killings
         inevitably involve a perceived  breach  of  moral  /  cultural  and
         religious mores as to sexual relationships, and given the  accepted
         prevalence of honour killings, it must follow that  notwithstanding
         the risks involved, there are those prepared to breach those mores.




      9. Ms Aboni acknowledged that  there  was  no  rule  24  response  but
         nevertheless opposed the appeal.  She submitted that the First-tier
         Tribunal was entitled to make the findings it did, which took  into
         account the relevant country background evidence.




     10. At the end of the hearing I  reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.





Error of law discussion



     11. The First-tier Tribunal appears to have  considered  that  a  woman
         with W's characteristics would not have met the  appellant  in  the
         manner claimed.  The First-tier  Tribunal  predicated  its  adverse
         credibility finding firmly  on  a  conclusion  that  the  described
         behaviour, in the context of the KAA,  is  implausible.   No  clear
         reasons are provided  for  this.   No  attempt  has  been  made  to
         reconcile this finding with the country  background  evidence  that
         honour killings remain a serious problem i.e. notwithstanding  that
         strict moral code compliance that is expected, individuals continue
         to breach this and for this reason, inter alia, become  victims  of
         honour killings.




     12. In KB & AH (credibility-structured approach) Pakistan  [2017]  UKUT
         491 (IAC) the Tribunal recently  considered  the  approach  to  the
         'credibility indicators' in the respondent's policy and  said  this
         regarding the 'plausibility indicator':




             "28. Second, Mr Wilding's concession  rests  the  respondent's
             case on [lack of] plausibility, an indicator  or  factor  that
             has been seen by the Tribunal and the courts -  as  is  indeed
             reflected in this same Instruction - as one that, although  in
             itself valid, requires a certain  degree  of  caution  in  its
             application. Thus in HK v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 case at [28]-[30] Neuberger LJ
             stated:

                  "28. Further, in many asylum cases, some,  even  most,  of
                  the appellant's story may  seem  inherently  unlikely  but
                  that does not mean that it is untrue. The  ingredients  of
                  the story, and the story as a whole, have to be considered
                  against the available country evidence and reliable expert
                  evidence, and other familiar factors, such as  consistency
                  with what the appellant has said before,  and  with  other
                  factual evidence (where there is any).

                  29.  Inherent probability, which may be  helpful  in  many
                  domestic  cases,  can  be  a  dangerous,  even  a   wholly
                  inappropriate, factor to rely on  in  some  asylum  cases.
                  Much of the evidence will be referable to  societies  with
                  customs and circumstances which are  very  different  from
                  those of which the members of  the  fact-finding  tribunal
                  have any (even  second-hand)  experience.  Indeed,  it  is
                  likely that the country which an  asylum-seeker  has  left
                  will  be  suffering  from  the  sort   of   problems   and
                  dislocations  with  which  the  overwhelming  majority  of
                  residents of this country will be wholly  unfamiliar.  The
                  point is well made in Hathaway on Law  of  Refugee  Status
                  (1991) at page 81:

                      'In assessing the general human  rights  information,
                      decision-makers must constantly be on guard to  avoid
                      implicitly recharacterizing the nature  of  the  risk
                      based on their own perceptions of reasonability."

                  30. Inherent improbability in the context of asylum  cases
                  was discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in  Awala  -v-
                  Secretary of State [2005] CSOH 73.  At  paragraph  22,  he
                  pointed  out  that  it  was  "not  proper  to  reject   an
                  applicant's account merely on the basis  that  it  is  not
                  credible or not plausible.  To  say  that  an  applicant's
                  account  is  not  credible  is  to  state  a   conclusion"
                  (emphasis added). At paragraph 24, he said that  rejection
                  of a story on grounds of implausibility must be  done  "on
                  reasonably drawn inferences and not simply  on  conjecture
                  or speculation". He went on to emphasise, as did  Pill  LJ
                  in Ghaisari, the entitlement of the  fact-finder  to  rely
                  "on his common sense and his ability, as a  practical  and
                  informed person, to identify what is or is not plausible".
                  However, he accepted  that  "there  will  be  cases  where
                  actions   which   may   appear   implausible   if   judged
                  by...Scottish   standards,   might   be   plausible   when
                  considered within the context of  the  applicant's  social
                  and cultural background".

             29. Reflecting much the same caution, paragraph 5.6.4 of  this
             Home Office Instruction invokes, inter alia, what was said  in
             Y v Secretary of State [2006] EWCA Civ 1223:

                  "[I]n [Y] the Court of Appeal stated that in regarding  an
                  account as incredible the decision-maker  must  take  care
                  not to do so merely because it would not be  plausible  if
                  it had happened in the UK. Again, underlying  factors  may
                  well lead to behaviour and responses on the  part  of  the
                  claimant which run counter to what would be expected."

             30. The reference by Neuberger LJ at [28] of HK to the need to
             consider factors related to  plausibility  along  with  "other
             familiar factors... such as consistency" is also  illustrative
             of the need to avoid basing credibility assessment on just one
             indicator. We would  add  that  even  when  focusing  just  on
             plausibility, it is not a concept with clear edges.  Not  only
             may there be degrees of  (im)plausibility,  but  sometimes  an
             aspect of an account that may be implausible  in  one  respect
             may be plausible in another.

             31. It seems to us that the indicators identified in the  Home
             Office Instruction (which  can  be  summarised  as  comprising
             sufficiency  of   detail;   internal   consistency;   external
             consistency; and plausibility)  provide  a  helpful  framework
             within  which  to  conduct  a  credibility  assessment.   They
             facilitate a more structured approach apt to help judges avoid
             the temptation to look at the evidence  in  a  one-dimensional
             way or to focus in an ad hoc way solely on whichever indicator
             or factor appears foremost or opportune."

     13. When the decision is read  as  a  whole,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         overly focused solely upon the plausibility indicator in an ad  hoc
         manner, without considering this alongside  and  in  light  of  the
         other indicators supporting the credibility of the account provided
         by the appellant: internal consistency;  consistency  with  country
         background evidence; of sufficient detail and specificity.




     14. The finding that a woman would not behave in the  manner  described
         speculates that all women follow the moral code  and  social  mores
         expected and implies that it is not  even  reasonably  likely  that
         some women may risk breaching this.  This in itself is contrary  to
         the country background evidence relating to the serious problem and
         prevalence of honour killings.




     15. I acknowledge that the First-tier Tribunal regarded the failure  to
         claim  asylum  in  France  and  Austria  to  be  damaging  to   the
         appellant's credibility.  This finding is made as an aside  to  the
         real  reason   for   finding   the   claim   incredible:   apparent
         implausibility.




     16. I  accept  Ms  Aboni's  submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         considered the appeal on the alternative basis that the account  as
         to the relationship with W could be  accepted  at  [40]  but  found
         there to be "no satisfactory evidence" to support  the  appellant's
         claim that W's family  has  influence  throughout  the  KAA.    The
         difficulty with this alternative finding is that it is based upon a
         rejection of the appellant's evidence as  well,  and  is  therefore
         infected by the error of law I have already identified.





Conclusion



     17. This is an appeal that turned entirely on the  credibility  of  the
         appellant's claim to be in a particular relationship.  The  failure
         to adequately explain the finding that a woman would not behave  in
         the manner claimed, given the application of the lower standard and
         when viewed in context, constitutes an error of law such  that  the
         decision must be set aside.





Disposal



     18. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
         This is because completely fresh findings of fact are necessary.

Decision

     19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     20. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
18 January 2018

