
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13663/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 May 2021                       |On 27 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Talacchi

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1969  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Albania. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State refusing his asylum and human rights claims. The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 5 May  2020,  allowed
    the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds. The Secretary  of  State
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's account of past events in Albania are summarised by the
    judge at [3]. In short, the appellant was a soldier and later a spy for
    the Albanian government during the war in Kosovo during which  Albanian
    military forces acted together with the Kosovo Liberation  Army  (KLA).
    The Secretary of State considered that the appellant should be excluded
    from  asylum  protection  under  Article  1F(c)  of  the  1951  Refugee
    Convention. Article 1F provides:

         'The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:

         (a) He has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime
         against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn
         up to make provision in respect of such crimes;

         (b) He has committed a  serious  non-political  crime  outside  the
         country of refuge prior to his  admission  to  that  country  as  a
         refugee;

         (c) He has been  guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
         principles of the United Nations.'

    The parties agree that the judge erred by proceeding on  the  incorrect
    basis that the Secretary of State sought to exclude the appellant under
    sub-paragraph (a) rather than (c). At  [9]  the  judge  refers  to  the
    respondent having failed to discharge the burden of proving  'that  the
    appellant committed crimes against humanity...' [my emphasis].

 3. The submissions made at the initial hearing were not entirely clear  as
    to the materially of the judge's error. I am satisfied that  the  judge
    did proceed to consider the incorrect element  of  Article1F.  However,
    the validity of the Secretary of State's further contention,  that  the
    judge misunderstood the argument advanced by  the  Secretary  of  State
    when he writes at [9] that the respondent has 'not suggested' that  the
    appellant  'had  knowingly  transferred  arms  to  the  KLA  after  the
    implementation  of  the  United  Nations  Security  Council  Resolution
    regarding the transfer of arms into Kosovo adopted on 31  March  1998',
    whilst it may literally be accurate has, in effect, been negated by the
    judge's finding at the end of paragraph [9] ;

         "In fairness to Ms Cunha, she put  to  the  appellant  consistently
         that he had not been aware [that the arms  were  intended  for  the
         KLO] and rather more is required for the respondent persuasively to
         claim that the burden of proof had been discharged."

    That finding, that the appellant did not knowingly  take  part  in  the
    transfer of arms, is, in my opinion, sufficiently cogent and  clear  to
    stand.  Therefore,  whether  or  not  the  judge  mischaracterised  the
    respondent's case on the transfer of arms after the UN resolution,  the
    finding renders any error immaterial; the finding is equally applicable
    to sub-paragraphs (a) and (c) of Article 1. I find  that,  although  he
    erred in his reference to 'crimes against humanity' at [9], the judge's
    findings of fact are sound and sufficiently comprehensive to render his
    error immaterial.

 4. As I understood the representatives, the second ground (that the  judge
    made an unsustainable finding that  the  appellant  had  'consistently'
    maintained that the KLA were  transferring  weapons  into  Kosovo  'for
    their own purposes' [9]) was dropped by the respondent  at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Case Management Review. The  alleged  inconsistencies  in
    the appellant's account appear in his second  asylum  interview  (AIR2)
    which the  Tribunal  at  the  Case  Management  Review  considered  was
    unreliable as evidence after the appellant  had  complained  about  the
    quality of the interpretation.  Both  representatives  at  the  initial
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal agreed that the judge had  not  erred  by
    describing the appellant's evidence as 'consistent.'

 5. The third ground, that the judge failed to consider Article 33  of  the
    Rome  Statute  'with  respect  to  [the  appellant's]  culpability  and
    superior orders' also arises from the answers which the  appellant  had
    given at AIR2.

 6. As regards Article 3 ECHR, the Secretary of State  has  not  challenged
    the judge's finding at [11];

         "The respondent did not suggest ... that the  Albanian  authorities
         are able and willing to offer ... the appellant a  sufficiently  of
         protection from the violent actions of gangsters in Albania."

    That assessment followed on from the judge's  unchallenged  finding  at
    [10]  that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  from   gangsters.   Whatever
    shortcomings  may  exist  in  the  judge's  analysis   of   the   claim
    for/exclusion from asylum, his findings on Article 3 ECHR are clear and
    sustainable. I do not agree with the respondent's submission  that  any
    error in the application  of  Article  1F  has  'tainted'  the  judge's
    findings of fact on Article 3 ECHR.

 7. Article 8 ECHR is slightly more problematic. At [13], the judge appears
    to find that the appeal should be allowed on  Article  8  ECHR  (family
    life) grounds but states in the final sentence that the Article 8  ECHR
    appeal is dismissed. Under the heading Notice of  Decision,  the  judge
    has then stated 'the appeal  on  human  rights  ...  (Article  8  ECHR)
    grounds is allowed.' I find that the final sentence of [13] contains  a
    typographical error and that it is sufficiently clear  that  the  judge
    intended to allow the Article 8 ECHR appeal.

 8. The judge's decision is not without problems. I am satisfied,  for  the
    reasons which I have given, that the judge's decision on Article 3  and
    8 ECHR is sound in  law.  As  regards  asylum,  I  find  that  (i)  any
    potential  problems  concerning  the  consistency  of  the  appellant's
    evidence arising from the AIR2 were removed following the  respondent's
    concession at the Case Management Review and; (ii) the judge's  finding
    that the respondent had not discharged the burden of proof  in  respect
    of Article 1F(a) is equally applicable to Article  1F(c).  The  judge's
    error in the application of Article 1F does not require me to set aside
    his  decision.  Accordingly,  the  Secretary  of  State's   appeal   is
    dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed


Signed                              Date 15 May 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.














