



















                                                        [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13231/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2019                          |On 15 November 2019           |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                             THILAKASEKARAM [V]
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:         Ms R. Kotak of counsel, instructed by Gurney
Harden Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr. S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a  national  of  Sri  Lanka.  He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 22 February 2009 and applied for asylum the  next  day.  His
    claim was refused  on  17  May  2011  and  his  subsequent  appeal  was
    dismissed by Immigration Judge Cohen, in a determination promulgated on
    29 July 2011. His appeal rights became exhausted on 9 September 2011.

2.   Further submissions were made on 23 December 2013 and 10 January  2017,
    but the Respondent was not satisfied that he had made a fresh claim  on
    either occasion. However, the Appellant challenged the second  decision
    by bringing a claim for judicial review.  Permission was granted on the
    basis that there had not been sufficient anxious  scrutiny  applied  to
    medical records which may have suggested that  his  mental  health  had
    affected his ability to give cogent evidence.

3.   The claim  for  judicial  review  was  withdrawn  by  consent  and  the
    Respondent reconsidered her decision but made  a  further  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant refugee status on 6 November 2018. He appealed and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana dismissed the Appellant's appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 18 July 2019. The  Appellant  appealed  against
    this  decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly   granted   him
    permission to appeal on 1 October 2019.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Counsel for the Appellant made  oral  submissions  and  then  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer accepted that there was force in the contents
    of ground one of the grounds of appeal. I have taken these  submissions
    into account when reaching my findings below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   It is clear from the Respondent's decision that the  Appellant's  fresh
    claim was partly based on the fact that he had  been  tortured  in  Sri
    Lanka and that he would be at risk of persecution  there,  due  to  his
    involvement with the TGTE and TCC. He also claimed that his  sur  place
    activities in the United Kingdom would mean that he would be identified
    by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  if  he  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.  The
    Appellant's  counsel  had  also  submitted  a  very  detailed  skeleton
    argument which indicated that he still relied on his own activities  in
    Sri Lanka and also his brother's.

6.   Therefore, it was not the case, as found by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chana in paragraph 20 of her decision, that "the  only  issue  in  this
    appeal is whether the appellant's sur[place] activities in  the  United
    Kingdom with  Eelam,  a  proscribed  organisation  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities [will lead to persecution] on his return".

7.   There was a significant amount of medical  evidence  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chana. In particular, there was a psychiatric report  by
    Dr. Zapata, dated 14 September 2016, and a further  psychiatric  report
    by Dr. Balasubramanian, dated 19 April 2019.  The  latter  specifically
    stated that the Appellant  may  have  difficulty  recalling  events  in
    chronological order and attributed his post-traumatic  stress  disorder
    to the torture he had experienced  in  detention  in  Sri  Lanka.   The
    Appellant had also provided  a  copy  of  his  medical  records,  which
    consistently stated that the Appellant had reported  feeling  depressed
    and suicidal from 2011 onwards.

8.   However, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chana  did  not  analyse  of  this
    evidence but merely said in paragraph 23 of her decision:

     "I have considered the medical evidence provided by the  appellant.  At
    the hearing the appellant said that he is not in  therapy  although  he
    has been referred by his General  Practitioner  but  there  is  a  long
    waiting list. The appellant's account of what he claims happened to him
    in Sri Lanka was not believed and I do  not  accept  that  his  medical
    evidence should disturb that finding of the previous judge".

9.   In addition, the Judge did not give any reasons for  finding  that  the
    medical evidence did not disturb  the  findings  of  Immigration  Judge
    Cohen. It was not sufficient to just state that the Appellant  was  not
    currently receiving any counselling, when the Appellant  had  explained
    that he was on a waiting list and there was no evidence before  her  as
    to how patients were prioritised  for  counselling.  It  was  also  the
    Appellant's evidence, as confirmed  in  paragraph  12  of  the  Judge's
    decision, that the Appellant's GP had told him in case of an  emergency
    he should phone the doctor.  Furthermore,  the  record  of  proceedings
    confirms that, in his oral evidence, the Appellant explained  that  his
    GP has explained that, if he was feeling down or thinking  of  suicide,
    he should contact him.

10.  The Judge's failure to take this medical  evidence  into  account  also
    undermined her findings in  paragraph  30  of  her  decision  that  "no
    credible reason has been given for why [the Appellant] waited all  this
    time to become a member [of the TGTE] other than  to  say  the  he  was
    traumatised".  I also note that the Judge failed to treat the Appellant
    as a vulnerable witness, as  requested  at  the  hearing,  despite  the
    psychiatric              evidence              before              her.





11.  It is also arguable that the Judge failed to give sufficient weight  to
    the statement by Mr. Yogalingam,  the  President  of  the  Transitional
    Government of Tamil Eelam. She had refused the Appellant an adjournment
    on the basis that no prejudice or unfairness would arise from the  fact
    that this witness could not attend on the date of the hearing. However,
    nowhere in her findings does she mention Mr. Yogalingam's evidence.  In
    particular, his evidence would have been potentially very  relevant  in
    relation to her findings in paragraph  41  of  her  decision  that  the
    Appellant's participation in demonstrations and  other  activities  had
    been merely opportunistic.

12.  In addition,  the  Judge  failed  to  give  any  consideration  of  the
    substance of  the  evidence  contained  in  the  Appellant's  brother's
    witness statement in which he said that, when he was  arrested  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities in 2016, he was accused of  working  to  regroup
    the LTTE and of having received financial support from the Appellant to
    do so. It was not sufficient for the Judge to  merely  query  why  this
    brother did not attend. She should have considered what weight to  give
    to his evidence, which was that the Appellant was  sympathetic  to  the
    LTTE and sent him funds by money transfer. This  was  particularly  the
    case, when this account had been accepted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Bart-Stewart in its entirety.

13.  Furthermore, in paragraph 45 of her decision,  the  Judge  found  as  a
    fact that his brother did not attend as he was in Sri Lanka when  there
    was no evidence to support this finding.  In  his  oral  evidence,  the
    Appellant had said that this brother could not attend  because  of  his
    mental illness.  This was confirmed  by  his  brother  in  his  witness
    statement where he said: "I suffer from various  mental  health  issues
    following my detention and torture and hate talking about my  detention
    in Sri Lanka; hence, I am not attending court to  give  evidence  as  I
    would be asked about my detention and questioning. This  would  trigger
    my memories that I have been trying so hard to forget".

14.  The Appellant's brother had also provided a copy of  the  determination
    of his own asylum appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Steward,
    which was promulgated on 20  March  2019.  There  was  nothing  in  the
    evidence to suggest that the Appellant's brother had ever been back  to
    Sri Lanka since arriving here on 13 August 2016. In  addition,  as  his
    asylum appeal was only  allowed  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart on 20 March 2019, he clearly was not the person referred to  by
    Immigration  Judge  Cohen  in  paragraph  8   of   his   determination,
    promulgated on 29 July 2011, who was a British citizen.

15.  In addition, the Judge did not  give  any  weight  to  the  Appellant's
    father's statement in which he said that the Sri Lankan authorities had
    shown him a  copy  of  newspaper  article  which  had  an  accompanying
    photograph of the Appellant at a protest in London and had  also  shown
    him television footage.

16.  Finally, the Appellant had provided a  copy  of  his  medical  records,
    which consistently stated  that  the  Appellant  had  reported  feeling
    depressed and suicidal from 2011 onwards and this was confirmed in both
    Dr.Zapata and Dr. Balasubramaniam's reports  and  the  Appellant's  own
    third statement. In the context of this evidence,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chana failed to reach any findings on whether the risk  that  the
    Appellant may commit suicide gave rise to a breach of Article 3 of  the
    ECHR.

17.  For all of these reasons I find that there were material errors of  law
    in First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana's decision.

DECISION
(1)  The Appellant's appeal is granted.
(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana's decision is set aside.
(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  re-
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen, Chana or Kelly.

Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 11 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

