
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13269/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 December 2020                   |On 06 January 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                O M F (Iraq)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Esen Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Ms Jyoti Wood, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of O M F who is the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    decision on 7 November 2018 to refuse him refugee status under the 1951
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds. The claimant is a citizen of  Iraq  of
    Kurdish ethnicity, and a Sunni Muslim.

Background

 2. The claimant was born in 1986 in Tobzawa, Iraq,  which  lies  about  an
    hour north of Kirkuk, in the Kirkuk Governorate.  He is 34  years  old.
    The Kirkuk Governorate is not within  the  Independent  Kurdish  Region
    (the IKR).

 3. The claimant's family left Tobzawa in 1987, towards the end of the Iran-
    Iraq war.  The claimant was just a year old. They spent  the  next  few
    years in Bnaslawa, on the outskirts of Erbil city  in  Erbil  Province,
    which is in the IKR.  The family returned home to Tobzawa in 1992.  The
    claimant would have been 5 years  old  then.  His  father  died  in  an
    explosion in 2003, at the time of the United States invasion  of  Iraq.
    Life became very hard for the  claimant's  mother  and  siblings  after
    that.

 4. In Iraq, the claimant still has his mother and his three siblings,  two
    of whom are disabled: his older sister has a learning difficulty and is
    unable to read or write, needing constant care, and his younger brother
    has a spinal problem and achondroplasia (dwarfism) which means that  he
    has very short hands  and  cannot  move  his  body  properly.   In  one
    account, he has been paralysed since birth.

 5. The claimant's youngest brother is fit and healthy.

 6. The claimant also has a police officer cousin in his home area.

 7. The claimant attended school for 5 or 6  years.   His  account  of  his
    schooling varies, either having been all  in  Kurdish  Sorani,  or  the
    first three years in Sorani, and the last two or three years in Arabic.
     He says he is not fluent in Arabic.

 8. After leaving school, at the age  of  10,  the  claimant  first  worked
    selling cigarettes, then as a labourer, before  getting  a  job  as  an
    assistant to a car mechanic.  When he was 20 (in 2006) he  started  his
    own car repair business with his younger brother.

 9. In August 2015, the claimant briefly left Iraq fearing  persecution  or
    serious harm at the hands of ISIL, who had taken control  of  his  home
    area.  He travelled via Turkey,  Bulgaria  and  Serbia,  ending  up  in
    Hungary, where he was twice fingerprinted, on his evidence  both  times
    in August 2015.  The claimant's evidence is that he returned  again  in
    September 2015.

10. In April 2016, the claimant says he was asked by a man to fix his  car.
    The man was a regular customer.  The police raided the claimant's  home
    while the car was there, and found explosives in both the  car  and  in
    the claimant's home.  The man's car was impounded, and so were some  of
    the claimant's personal possessions.

11.  The  claimant  asserts  that  he  is  thus  linked  now  to  terrorist
    activities, and relies on an arrest warrant dated  21  April  2016,  of
    which a photograph was obtained for him by his  police  officer  cousin
    and sent by social media for use in  these  proceedings.  The  claimant
    fears arrest and ill treatment by the Iraqi authorities if returned.

12. In May 2016, the claimant  left  Iraq  again,  travelling  via  Turkey,
    Hungary, and a number of countries he  says  he  cannot  identify.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 May  2016  and  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival.

13. Following the claimant's departure, on 16 October 2017  the  claimant's
    family left Tobzawa again, and went to live in Qara Hanjeer, which lies
    half an hour by car to the east of Kirkuk.  He stayed in  contact  with
    them by phone although his account is  that  he  lost  touch  with  his
    family in March 2020.

14. The police officer cousin  obtained  the  photographs  of  the  alleged
    arrest warrant and another similar document  in  late  2018  and  early
    2019.  He is said to have disappeared in or about  May  2020,  and  the
    claimant fears that the cousin is in difficulty because of  the  favour
    he did the claimant in obtaining that evidence.

First-tier Tribunal decision

15. On 21 August 2019, the First-tier Judge allowed the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and made an anonymity direction, which I maintain.   The  judge
    rejected the core account as lacking in credibility and found as a fact
    that neither the claimant, nor any member of his family, had ever  been
    of specific adverse interest to ISIL.   The judge also found  that  the
    claimant would not be at risk on return to Iraq, either  by  reason  of
    his Sunni Muslim faith, or because he was a Kurd.

16. However, the  judge  directed  himself  by  reference  to  the  country
    guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) and  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC).   He
    found as a fact that the claimant was not in possession of his passport
    or any identity documentation and that his family, who were  no  longer
    living in the home region, could not  be  expected  to  assist  him  in
    obtaining a CSID to enable him to travel internally.  The claimant  had
    no links in the IKR and even if he returned with a laissez  passer,  he
    could not safely return via Baghdad or travel overland without the CSID
    identity document which he lacked,  and  could  not  obtain.   Internal
    relocation was not open to him.

17. The  First-tier  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  and
    indicated that even if it had failed on asylum grounds, he  would  have
    allowed it on humanitarian protection grounds or, in  the  alternative,
    that return would be contrary to Article 3 ECHR as he would face a real
    risk of suffering serious harm.

18. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.





Permission to appeal

19. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Judge  Holmes  on  28
    October 2019, on the basis that the judge  arguably  had  not  properly
    applied current country guidance (in context, the  AAH  decision),  had
    not considered whether Erbil Province, where the claimant lived  for  5
    years between 1987 and 1992 was an alternative 'home area', or  whether
    the claimant would be accepted by the IKR authorities  as  a  returning
    resident of that region.

20. Given the adverse credibility  findings  had  been  made  on  the  core
    account,  Judge  Holmes  considered   that   there   was   insufficient
    explanation why the claimant's assertion that he was undocumented,  and
    unable to obtain any identity documents, had been accepted by the First-
    tier Judge.

Error of law decision

21. On 18 December 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch set  aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision for  error  of  law.  She  considered  that  the
    reasoning of the First-tier Judge about  the  claimant's  documentation
    issue was inadequate and did not properly apply AAH.  A number of other
    errors of law were identified.  The appeal was retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for remaking.

Procedural history

22. A hearing listed for 13 February 2020 was adjourned,  as  Ms  Wood  was
    unwell.  Judge Finch gave additional directions  in  her  order  of  17
    February 2020 recording the adjournment, and again on 3 April 2020  and
    7 May 2020.

23. The appeal was then listed for a remaking hearing before me, a transfer
    order having been made by Principal  Resident  Judge  Kopieczek  on  22
    October 2020.

24. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

25. There were three preliminary points raised on the claimant's behalf  by
    Ms Wood at the beginning of the hearing:

      a) The first concerned interpretation. A  Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter
         was booked to assist the claimant at the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing.
         However, at the beginning of the hearing, Ms Wood  raised  a  query
         about the interpreter's dialect: he spoke Iraqi Kurdish Sorani, not
         Iranian Kurdish Sorani.   The  claimant's  solicitors  had  brought
         their own interpreter to the hearing and it was agreed that he, the
         claimant, or the court interpreter, would let me know if there were
         any difficulties in the evidence.  At the end of the  hearing,  all
         three  confirmed  that  there  had  been  no  difficulty  with  the
         translation.




      b) A second preliminary issue was raised.  Some findings by the First-
         tier  Judge  had  been  displaced.   The  claimant  relied  on   AB
         (Preserved First-tier  Tribunal  findings:  Wisniewski  principles)
         [2020] UKUT 268 (IAC), but in fact it is clear from the decision of
         Upper Tribunal Judge Finch at (2) in the Decision section that  the
         appeal was to be reheard on all issues. I approach this  appeal  on
         the basis that  no  findings  of  fact  or  credibility  have  been
         preserved.




      c) The claimant was said to have depression and might need  breaks  in
         his evidence, having regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note
         No 2 of 2010.

26. The hearing then proceeded to the substantive evidence and remaking  of
    the appeal decision.

Claimant's evidence

27. On 27 May 2016, in his screening interview, the  claimant  denied  ever
    having been fingerprinted in any country,  including  his  own,  saying
    that he had never used his passport and had left it in Iraq.  The basis
    for his asylum claim was said to be that ISIL  had  threatened  him  at
    work and told him to work, fixing their vehicles.  He claimed  to  have
    received a threat letter from ISIL, which might or might not  still  be
    at his home in Iraq.  He had never been accused of, or  committed,  any
    offence in any country.

28. In a third country interview, later the  same  day,  the  claimant  was
    advised of Eurodac records showing that his fingerprints were taken  in
    Hungary, on 31  August  2015  and  13  November  2015.    The  claimant
    continues to deny that the second Eurodac record is accurate: his  case
    is that he was back in Iraq by then.

29. The asylum interview did not occur until 21 September  2018,  over  two
    years after the screening  and  travel  interviews.    This  time,  the
    claimant introduced the account of  the  man  who  brought  a  car  for
    repair, which had explosives in it, and  the  explosive  found  in  his
    house.  That is a significantly different account: instead of being  at
    risk from ISIL, the claimant now feared the Iraqi  authorities  on  the
    basis that he is a perceived criminal and a  terrorist.   The  claimant
    told the First-tier Tribunal that he could not  remember  what  he  had
    said two years earlier and that it was normal to forget things.

30. The claimant now said the ISIL threat  was  a  telephone  call,  not  a
    letter.  The claimant in his oral evidence to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    still had no  explanation  for  the  November  2015  fingerprinting  in
    Hungary, when on his account he was in Iraq, save that Eurodac must  be
    wrong.   This is important, because if the claimant did not  return  to
    Iraq in September 2015 but remained in Hungary, his account of the  car
    repair and the subsequent events in April 2016 is not credible.

Oral evidence

31. I asked the claimant at the beginning of the hearing what medication he
    was taking for his depression, and how he was  feeling.   The  claimant
    said, that he had a headache, but he had taken a paracetamol  pill  and
    was ready to testify.  He had no antidepressant prescription  but  took
    paracetamol when he needed it.  He would let me know if he was  feeling
    strained and needed a break.  The claimant said that he had not seen  a
    general medical practitioner, although he had recently registered  with
    one and would try to see a doctor.

32. The claimant had prepared an updated witness  statement  dated  26  May
    2020, which he identified and adopted.  He recalled an earlier  witness
    statement for the First-tier Tribunal but not its contents: it had been
    too long ago.  Save, therefore, for the evidence recorded in the First-
    tier Judge's decision (which remains relevant, even though his findings
    and conclusions were set aside), I have disregarded that statement.

33. The interpreter and claimant confirmed at the beginning of his evidence
    that they could understand each other.  There might be  some  different
    vocabulary but there was no real difficulty.

34. Ms Wood had some supplementary questions for the claimant.   She  asked
    him first, if he were in Tobzawa and needed to  renew  his  CSID  card,
    where he would need to go.  He said that the  registry  office  was  in
    Kirkuk.  The claimant confirmed that he  did  speak  a  little  Arabic,
    although it was not very good.  He could speak '30%'.

35. The claimant said he had lost contact with  his  family.   He  used  to
    contact them about once a month, through  his  police  officer  cousin,
    using the cousin's phone as none of them had mobile phones, but had not
    been able to do so since February 2020.  He  had  tried  to  reach  his
    cousin since then, a few times, without success.  The  last  time  they
    spoke, the claimant's cousin said that he was in  trouble  for  sending
    the claimant the papers the claimant asked him to provide in 2018.  The
    cousin's Facebook account was still open and active, but there had been
    no new posts or pictures since  March  2020  and  his  cousin  was  not
    online, either there or on Messenger.

36.  Certain  Facebook  Messenger  conversations  were  included   in   the
    claimant's supplementary bundle, including one where a comment was left
    on his Facebook profile saying, 'Leave this place and  move,  we  don't
    want you here.  You are the cause of pain  and  the  bad  luck  of  the
    nation'.  That was on a comment which the claimant had  re-posted:  the
    claimant  clarified  that  the  poster's  comment  was  aimed  at   the
    government of Kurdistan, not the claimant.

37. On 12 May 2020, there  was  a  post  which  the  claimant  had  written
    himself, criticising the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG).  The  reply
    from someone addressing him as 'cousin' was not from a cousin  of  his:
    that  was  a  courtesy  title  used  by  friends  between   themselves.
    Sometimes, they also said 'brother'.   There were further posts, by the
    claimant, on 19 and 22 April 2020.  The  claimant  confirmed  that  his
    Facebook criticism was of the KRG, not the government of Iraq.

38. The claimant told his Counsel that he could not remember the number  of
    his CSID card.

39. In cross-examination, the claimant said he had two brothers, a  sister,
    and his mother still in Iraq, but  had  not  contacted  them  directly,
    always through his cousin.  His family members did not  have  'internet
    and things'.  Two of the claimant's siblings had  medical  issues,  but
    his younger brother and his mother were in good health.  Unfortunately,
    neither of them had a mobile phone.

40. The claimant was asked about his schooling.  He had said,  at  question
    44 of the interview, that he spent three years studying in Kurdish, and
    three in Arabic.  He said that was wrong,  he  studied  at  school  for
    three years in Kurdish and just two in  Arabic.

41. Mr Tufan asked the claimant if he  remembered  when  he  first  claimed
    asylum that he had a  screening  interview.  He  agreed,  but  did  not
    remember where it had taken place: it was not at Customs, nor was it in
    London.   Mr  Tufan  reminded  the  claimant  that  at  his   screening
    interview, he was asked if  he  had  ever  been  fingerprinted  in  any
    country, including his own, but denied  having  been  fingerprinted  at
    all.   The claimant said he meant that he had not been fingerprinted on
    the second journey out of Iraq in 2016, to the United Kingdom.

42. His first journey out of  Iraq  had  been  to  Hungary.   He  had  been
    fingerprinted twice then, once at the police  station  and  once  three
    days later at the detention centre.  He was absolutely sure  there  had
    only been a 3-day gap between  the  two  fingerprint  taking  sessions:
    after the second, that September, he went  home.   Being  fingerprinted
    had bothered him a lot, so he left Hungary and went back home to Iraq.

43. The claimant was then asked about the incident in April 2016  where  he
    was repairing a car which was found to have explosives in it.  He  said
    that happened after he returned to Iraq.   The  claimant  had  his  own
    workshop in Iraq, just a small one.  When he left for Hungary the first
    time, the car lot became vacant, and nobody used it.  When the claimant
    returned, he rented the same shop again.  He never owned it and did not
    know how the owner used  it  when  he  was  away  in  Hungary.  It  was
    certainly vacant when the claimant returned from Hungary: the  claimant
    noticed no changes, and did not ask.

44. The claimant said his cousin, a police officer, had obtained a copy  of
    the arrest warrant dated 21 April 2016 for him.  The claimant  had  not
    dared to ask for it directly from the police.  He had  not  heard  from
    that cousin since June 2020, but although he was really worried, he did
    not want to call the police and ask about his  cousin,  or  ask  anyone
    else to do so, to see if his cousin was still all right.

45. There was no re-examination.  When I asked him, the claimant  confirmed
    that he had been reasonably comfortable when giving  his  evidence  and
    that he had no difficulty understanding the interpreter.

Dr Stein's evidence

46. I have had regard to the report of Dr George Stein, MB, BS, MRCP,  DCH,
    MRCPsych,  MPhil,  FRCPsych,  a  section  12(2)   approved   consultant
    psychiatrist, who is not currently in an NHS post.  He gives himself  a
    proper self-direction in accordance with the Ikarian Reefer duty to the
    Upper Tribunal.

47. Dr Stein qualified at University College Hospital in 1968, practised in
    general medicine for a time and then trained at the  Maudsley  Hospital
    before becoming a Consultant Psychiatrist in 1982 and taking up a  post
    in the Mother and Baby Unit at Farnborough Hospital, Bromley, Kent.  Dr
    Stein's lifelong psychiatric speciality is in mother  and  baby  mental
    health issues, but he also writes medico-legal reports on  all  aspects
    of adult general psychiatry. Dr Stein retired from NHS practice in 2004
    but has undertaken long term locums at the Gordon Hospital in Victoria,
    and in Guildford. He works as a medical member  on  the  Mental  Health
    Tribunal and has a small private practice.

48. Dr Stein interviewed the claimant on 27 September 2020, by  video  link
    with the assistance of a Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter.   No  supporting
    medical evidence or general medical practitioner records were available
    as the claimant, in the four years he has been in the  United  Kingdom,
    has had no contact with any medical practitioner, self-medicating  with
    paracetamol when he gets headaches or is depressed.

49. Dr Stein's  report  set  out  the  claimant's  account,  including  his
    assertion that when the police raided his family home  they  found  his
    clean clothes  and  his  CSID  there.   The  family  circumstances  and
    employment history are as above.

50. The claimant told Dr Stein that he went to primary school for 5  years,
    studying only in Kurdish Sorani.  On leaving school, he  trained  as  a
    car mechanic, working first as an assistant  to  another  mechanic  and
    then, when he was about 20, setting up his own business.  It was a very
    good business, supporting  the  family  after  his  father  died.   The
    claimant's younger brother worked with him in the car repair business.

51. The claimant said that he had been in the United Kingdom for four years
    but not learned to read or write English well, although his English was
    'not that bad'.   He had attended Barking and Dagenham College to study
    English but his studies were interrupted when he became depressed.   He
    was always depressed in the United Kingdom, but not in Iraq.  He  could
    not return to Iraq, as it would be dangerous  to  do  so.   His  police
    officer cousin had told him that he was 'wanted'  there,  had  obtained
    some evidence for  him,  but  had  now  disappeared.   He  feared  that
    something bad might have happened to his cousin.

52. The claimant told Dr Stein of frequent night  waking,  nightmares,  and
    waking up sweating.  He said he had been beaten at a checkpoint in Iraq
    and that the Shi'as are dominant now in Iraq, making it risky to  be  a
    Sunni Muslim there.  He said that his first name was one of three which
    were particularly recognisable as being Sunni names and  increased  the
    risk to him, but that the main reason he could not return to  Iraq  was
    that he was wanted by the Iraqi authorities.

53. The claimant was very isolated in the United Kingdom as he  claimed  to
    be too frightened to meet members of the Kurdish community.   He  cried
    often, and was using paracetamol to medicate his depression; he claimed
    to be addicted to it.  He had registered with  a  new  general  medical
    practitioner in Ilford.  He was sure he would be killed on return.

54. Dr Stein's opinion is at [33]-[42] of his report.  It does  not  engage
    with  either  the  Istanbul  Protocol  or  the  ICD-11  mental   health
    definitions.  It is really no more than a  repetition  of  the  account
    above.  Dr Stein confirms that the claimant's perception is that he  is
    at great danger in Iraq, but notes, correctly, that it is not  for  him
    as  psychiatrist  to  judge  how  dangerous  the  claimant's   personal
    situation would really be in Iraq.

Other evidence in the supplementary bundle

55. Arrest warrant evidence. The claimant produced a poor photograph of two
    documents, both dated 21 April 2016.  The  first  purports  to  be  the
    arrest warrant itself:

         "To:          All police stations and check points
         Subject:      Arrest warrant


         An arrest  warrant  has  been  issued  by  the  Criminal  Court  of
         Investigation of Kirkuk, by the respected judge (Faruq Osman  Amin)
         against the accused [name supplied] accused of participating  in  a
         terrorist organisation  in  accordance  with  Article  4  of  [the]
         Terrorism Acts and  there  is  an  ongoing  investigation  on  this
         matter. ..."

    No original document is available.  The crest of the Supreme  Judiciary
    Council  Presidency  of  Court  of  Appeal,   Kirkuk   Federal   Court,
    Investigation Court of Kirkuk,  which  appears  on  the  copy  is  very
    blurred and dark.

56. No copy of Article 4 of the Iraqi Terrorism Acts  is  provided  (it  is
    difficult to understand how it can  be  Article  4  of  more  than  one
    statute).

57. The claimant also produced a copy of an investigation  report,  bearing
    the same date of 21 April 2016, from First  Lieutenant  Jalal  Adbullah
    [sic] Ahmed, investigation officer, as follows:

         "To: [not completed]

         Subject: Report

         On  21/04/2016,  the  accused  [name  supplied]  was   accused   of
         participating in a terrorist organisation and according to  Article
         4 of Terrorism acts, an arrest  warrant  has  been  issued  by  the
         Police Station of Tirkalan which is affiliated with the  governates
         [sic] and quarters of Kirkuk province and inform all  check  points
         and police stations to look for him and arrest him according to the
         court order."

58. This document is an even worse copy, but in particular, I note that the
    crest in the middle at the top appears not to be straight and  is  very
    blurred.  I have been unable to place much weight on  either  of  these
    documents: applying the Tanveer Ahmed test, I do not consider  them  to
    be reliable.

Social media messages

59. The claimant provides copies of a number of social media messages  from
    his police officer cousin, and posts of his own on Facebook.  They  are
    all not dated in translation and it is  unclear  who  translated  them:
    these are not certified translations.

60. There is an exchange between the cousins on 24 and  28  November  2018,
    when the claimant says he is  waiting  for  a  reply,  and  the  police
    officer cousin says that he was offline, but will try to do  something.
    He says that 'it is too difficult, but for you I  will  put  myself  in
    danger whatever happens, at least I will take a picture, wait'.   In an
    exchange on 28 November 2018, the claimant says he needs the  documents
    before 5 December 2018, when his hearing is listed, and his cousin says
    he managed to take photographs and will send the pictures now.

61. Undated exchanges refer to the cousin sending  the  claimant  something
    that he had asked for yesterday night, and the response, as follows:

         "Thank you very much my dear cousin.  I don't know how to thank you
         for the favour you did for  me.   I  know  doing  such  things  are
         difficult.  I know you did that for me, you are my beloved cousin.

         My dear cousin, in order to prove it can you send me a copy of your
         police ID, with a supporting letter to prove that I did return back
         from Hungary to Iraq?"

62. Two voice messages in reply, on 6 and 10 December 2018,  say  that  the
    cousin lost his own original ID, along with all of his group, when they
    were fighting ISIL, and that before 16 October (year not specified, but
    presumably 2018), the police directorate wrote to Baghdad  to  get  new
    police IDs issued for them.  Baghdad replied  that  all  IDs  would  be
    changed and that now they would have to wait.  There had not yet been a
    response.

63. Later voice messages on 10 December 2018 specify that  police  identity
    cards are renewed annually and therefore the ones lost in  2018  cannot
    be replaced until 2019.  The cousin eventually produced a copy  of  his
    2015 police ID, which is out of date, and a  letter  from  the  General
    Director of Kirkuk Police, confirming that he is a police  commissioner
    and is still in service, dated 25 November 2018.  The cousin said  that
    police officers are required to serve any court order forthwith, or the
    officers  in  question  will  be  considered  negligent  and  will   be
    questioned as to why they delayed.

64. The cousin wrote a manuscript letter for the claimant to use  in  these
    proceedings, saying that 'after painstaking efforts I  managed  to  get
    [the claimant's] arrest warrant letter which has been  issued  (by  the
    Supreme Judiciary Council, Court of Appeal Kirkuk Federal) and  it  has
    been sent out to all police stations'. The claimant's response is  that
    'this is very authentic', and that the cousin should 'tell the  friends
    to arrange the [victory] party for this coming spring'.

65. There are then a number of other missed calls and exchanges, and copies
    of posts by the cousin which are hard  to  interpret  but  seem  to  be
    fairly politically provocative posts for a police officer. On 5 January
    2019, the claimant asks for a better copy of his manuscript letter  'as
    the previous pictures were blurry'. There follow exchanges between  the
    cousins in January and February 2020, including missed  call  from  the
    cousin on 22 February and a missed call back on 13 May 2020  and  again
    on the Friday before the hearing, in context 27 November 2020.

66. There is a reposted Facebook post from the  claimant's  Facebook  page.
    However, the response 'we don't want you here, you  are  the  cause  of
    pain, the bad luck of this nation' on the claimant's evidence refers to
    the KRG Government and is not a threat to  him.  The  claimant  himself
    posted on 12 May 2020 a comment aimed at the KDP, saying that  he  does
    not understand something, 'their leader is a Mullah but  through  their
    TV channels they bring people who are like a dog on our sacred  Islam'.
    A response, directed to the claimant, asks him to  check  whether  they
    [the KDP] do or do not have Hajis, [people who have made the pilgrimage
    to Mecca] among  them  'as  they  don't  believe  in  it'.   That  post
    addresses the claimant as 'cousin' but he says that in context, it is a
    courtesy title and that particular poster is not his cousin.

Submissions

67. For the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Tufan  relied  on  the  discrepancies
    identified in the refusal letter and between the  appellant's  evidence
    in his statements and his evidence at  the  hearing.   The  appellant's
    account about being fingerprinted had developed over time.  When  asked
    a straightforward question about it during screening, he said  that  he
    had never been fingerprinted.  Presented with evidence of  fingerprints
    being taken in Hungary, he said that it was only on one occasion.   Now
    his account in his witness statement  was  that  he  was  fingerprinted
    twice, three months apart, in August and November  2015,  but  in  oral
    evidence he had been quite sure that the fingerprints were taken  three
    days apart. The claimant was not telling the truth.

68. The claimant's account of what happened to his car repair  workshop  in
    2015 was equally unreliable and the Upper Tribunal should find that the
    claimant had never been back to Iraq at  all.   Mr  Tufan  acknowledged
    that this might not be the Secretary of State's strongest point, but it
    should be given some weight in the overall assessment of credibility.

69. The evidence the claimant gave at the previous  hearing  about  letters
    from ISIL was also unreliable.  The letters had  not  materialised  and
    were now said to be telephone threats.  The claimant's  Facebook  posts
    were not critical of the Iraqi government, but of the government of the
    KRG.  The claimant would be returned to Baghdad, not to the KRG.

70. The medical evidence produced in the supplementary bundle was not of  a
    high standard.  Dr Stein repeated paragraphs 18 and 13.  It  was  based
    on a remote examination, and on what the claimant  said  himself.   The
    principles in JL (medical reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT  145
    (IAC) were applicable. At this point in  Mr  Tufan's  submissions,  the
    claimant became distressed and left the room.  The hearing continued in
    his absence, with his agreement, and he later returned and rejoined the
    hearing.

71. Mr Tufan pointed out that  the  claimant  had  said  in  his  screening
    interview that he studied Arabic for three or four years,  whereas  now
    he said it was only for two years.

72. Mr Tufan accepted that the claimant was  entitled  to  succeed  in  his
    claim, if he had no CSID  and  could  not  replace  it.   However,  the
    claimant would be able to obtain a CSID in the United Kingdom: see SMO,
    KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) CG Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  400
    (IAC).  He should not be believed when he said that he did not remember
    his CSID number, given the low credibility of the rest of his  account.
    At [13] in the judicial headnote to SMO and others, the Upper  Tribunal
    found that given the importance of the  CSID  information,  most  Iraqi
    citizens would recall it, or it could be obtained from family  members.



73. The claimant still had family members  in  Iraq,  and  his  account  of
    having lost touch with them was not consistent with earlier accounts of
    direct contact, rather than through the  police  officer  cousin.   The
    claimant had never before said that his mother and younger brother  had
    no phones.  The claimant's  account  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  at  this
    hearing was full of fabrications to support his claim that no help  was
    available for him in Iraq.

74. The Upper Tribunal should reject  the  core  account  and  dismiss  the
    appeal.

75. For the claimant, Ms Wood relied on the skeleton argument submitted  on
    30  November  2020  and  the  substantial  bundle  of  documents  which
    accompanied it.  In her skeleton argument, Ms Wood set out the  history
    of the matter and a number of factual disagreements with the First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  In relation to Article 15(c),  she  submitted  that
    the country guidance decisions accepted that the position in the former
    contested areas remained precarious, with resentment between Shi'a  and
    Sunni Muslims, and against the Kurds (see p246 of the hearing  bundle).
    The risk to civilians varied across Iraq but was highest in rural parts
    of the formerly contested areas [pages 257 and 285 of the bundle].

76. Ms Wood  reminded  the  Tribunal  of  the  'sliding  scale'  assessment
    required by the country guidance in  SMO  and  others  at  [3]  of  the
    judicial guidance.  The claimant was a Sunni Kurd  who  had  lived  and
    worked near Hawija, which had been controlled by ISIL until  2017.   Ms
    Wood accepted that he needed  to  show  more  than  that  in  order  to
    establish a present risk, but relied on the continuing activity of ISIL
    in the region, and his association with his police officer cousin,  who
    fought against ISIL,  giving  him  an  association  with  the  security
    apparatus, which was an enhanced  risk  factor.  The  tensions  between
    Sunni and Shi'a Muslims were set out in SMO and others,  in  particular
    at [45], [26], and [378].  The  claimant  was  very  likely  indeed  to
    encounter checkpoints manned by Iranian-backed Shi'a militia.

77. On the question of documents, the First-tier Judge had found as a  fact
    that the claimant did not have any  identity  documents  and  had  been
    entitled to do so, on the evidence before him.  It was also open to the
    judge to believe the claimant's account that he could  not  recall  his
    CSID details or contact any family members in Iraq.   Even  if  he  had
    that information, applied SMO and others at [396], if he were perceived
    to be a ISIL sympathiser, the document might be refused on the basis of
    such actual or perceived affiliation.

78. With regard to internal relocation and destitution, the claimant  would
    not be able to be returned to Iraq without a  CSID  or  INID  document.
    Where the  system  had  transitioned  to  the  INID  machines,  it  was
    necessary to attend  the  home  area  in  person  in  order  to  obtain
    replacement documents.  The Iraqi authorities would not  allow  him  to
    fly to Iraq without one of those documents.

79. Accordingly, internal relocation was not a reasonable  option  in  this
    case: the claimant had demonstrated that he had no CSID/INID and  would
    be unable to obtain one; he did not speak  good  Arabic  and  was  less
    likely to obtain employment;  he  had  no  qualifications;  he  had  no
    support network in Baghdad, nor sponsor to help him access  a  room  or
    accommodation; and as a Kurd, he was a member of a  minority  community
    facing discrimination everywhere outside  the  IKR.   Cumulatively,  on
    that basis, it would be unduly harsh to expect the claimant to relocate
    away from his home area and in any other area, he would be  exposed  to
    risk of persecutory treatment and/or serious harm.

80. Nor was it reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate  to  the  IKR:
    that too would be unduly harsh, as set out in the headnote to  SMO  and
    in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG  [2018]  UKUT  00212
    (IAC) for the difficulties in accessing  basic  necessities,  including
    employment and accommodation, without family  support.    The  claimant
    would be unable to gain access to an internally displaced persons camp,
    and critical accommodation did not offer a viable internal  relocation.
    The decision of the First-tier Judge should be upheld.

81. In oral submissions, Ms Wood agreed that the asylum claim would turn on
    the credibility of the claimant's account.  She argued that the loss of
    contact with his family was not a necessary fabrication, and  that  the
    claimant would have to go to Kirkuk in person  and  use  the  new  INID
    machines.  He had given the same responses at questions 236 and 237  of
    the asylum interview.  The assertion that the  fingerprinting  occurred
    three days apart was supported at question 157 of the asylum interview,
    though Ms Wood accepted that the claimant had said he  had  never  been
    fingerprinted, when screened.  He had given a plausible explanation for
    that in evidence today.  The interp for  the  screening  interview  was
    recorded as having been 'Kurdish' but no dialect was specified  in  the
    record of that interview.  The Eurodac printout  seemed  confusing,  as
    the times were the same and that, she submitted,  threw  doubt  on  the
    dates.

82. Evidence from the claimant's police  officer  cousin  stated  that  the
    claimant was in Iraq in September 2015, when he appeared to  have  been
    fingerprinted in Hungary.  Human error could occur on documents and  it
    was conceivable, at least, that the Eurodac  record  was  wrong.    The
    photographs of the arrest warrant had been taken in the toilet  by  the
    police officer cousin, which was why the  quality  was  poor,  and  was
    consistent with the cousin having taken them secretly.

83. The country evidence supported the risk to perceived collaborators:  BA
    (returns  to  Baghdad).   The  claimant's  account  was  plausible  and
    consistent with the country evidence. ISIL had asked him to work on the
    vehicle, not to join up.  The refusal letter did not disclose  material
    appropriate for a negative credibility finding.

84. The claimant remained at risk, both from the Iraqi state because of the
    arrest warrant,  and  from  ISIL,  as  a  perceived  collaborator.  The
    Secretary of State's February 2019 CPIN Perceived  Collaborators,  Iraq
    reflected systematic  targeting  of  collaborators,  and  the  claimant
    fitted the broad definition therein.  The  sliding  scale  for  Article
    15(c) was made out.  The claimant could  not  be  returned  because  he
    could not access his CSID: see AAH.

85.  Ms Wood asked me to allow the appeal.

Analysis

86. As regards the credibility of  the  claimant's  evidence,  I  have  had
    regard to the discrepancies identified above, particularly in  relation
    to when and where he was fingerprinted in  Hungary;  how  and  when  he
    contacts his family in Iraq; and whether he can remember the details of
    his CSID.

87. I have been unable to place any weight on the social media posts, which
    are plainly self-serving, or on the arrest warrant documents, which are
    blurred and bear clear signs of unreliability, applying Tanveer  Ahmed.
    They do not  contain  details  of  the  alleged  offence,  there  is  a
    reference to  a  single  Article  4  of  multiple  statutes,  they  are
    generally vague, and the headers have blurred and off centre stamps  on
    them.  I do not agree with the claimant's assessment  in  his  Facebook
    post that they look authentic.

88. I have also concluded  that  I  cannot  place  weight  on  the  medical
    evidence.  It lacks any kind of rigour, and amounts to no more  than  a
    recounting of the claimant's account. In JL (China), the Upper Tribunal
    gave the following guidance on medical evidence:

         "(1) Those writing medical  reports  for  use  in  immigration  and
         asylum appeals should ensure where possible  that,  before  forming
         their opinions, they study any assessments that have  already  been
         made of the appellant's credibility by the immigration  authorities
         and/or a tribunal judge (SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ  155  [30];
         BN (psychiatric evidence discrepancies)  Albania  [2010]  UKUT  279
         (IAC) at [49], [53])). When the materials to which they should have
         regard include previous determinations by a judge, they should  not
         conduct a running commentary on the reasoning of the judge who  has
         made such  findings,  but  should  concentrate  on  describing  and
         evaluating the medical evidence (IY (Turkey) [2012] EWCA  Civ  1560
         [37].


         (2)   They should also bear in mind that when an advocate wishes to
         rely on their medical report  to  support  the  credibility  of  an
         appellant's account, they will be expected to identify  what  about
         it affords support to what the appellant has said and which is  not
         dependent on what the appellant has said to the  doctor  (HE  (DRC,
         credibility and psychiatric reports) Democratic Republic  of  Congo
         [2004] UKAIT 000321). The more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming
         that the account given by the appellant was  to  be  believed,  the
         less likely it is that significant weight will be  attached  to  it
         (HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23]).


         (3)   The authors of such medical reports also need  to  understand
         that what is expected of them is a critical and objective  analysis
         of the injuries and/or symptoms displayed. They need to be vigilant
         that ultimately whether an appellant's account  of  the  underlying
         events is or is not credible and plausible is a question  of  legal
         appraisal and a matter for  the  tribunal  judge,  not  the  expert
         doctors (IY [47]; see also HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306  [17]-
         [18]). ..."

    That standard is not remotely met in Dr Stein's report.

89. As to the conflict between  the  claimant's  account  and  the  Eurodac
    record of the fingerprints taken in November 2015, having examined  the
    fingerprint document, and despite Ms Wood's contention that the Eurodac
    dates might be wrong, I find that I prefer the Eurodac evidence to that
    of the claimant.  Accordingly, I find that the claimant  was  still  in
    Hungary in late 2015, when he says he was back in Iraq.   I  find  that
    even to the  lower  standard  applicable  in  international  protection
    claims, I  am  not  satisfied  that  he  ever  returned  to  Iraq.  The
    claimant's account of what happened to his workshop is  incredible,  to
    any standard.

90. The claimant's account is totally lacking in credibility.  It bears the
    hallmarks of a  poorly  fabricated  attempt  to  bring  himself  within
    whatever he considers to be the current risk groups  each  time  he  is
    interviewed.

91. I reject the whole of the account of the April 2016 events, the  arrest
    warrants, and  the  subsequent  disappearance  of  the  police  officer
    cousin.  The warrant photographs were obtained  in  December  2018  and
    resent in January 2019.  I do not accept, even to the  lower  standard,
    that  they  would  result  in  the  claimant's  police  officer  cousin
    disappearing suddenly in the spring of 2020.  I am not  satisfied  that
    he is a police officer as alleged: even if the  police  identity  cards
    for 2018 had been lost, 2019 has come and gone and  he  should  by  now
    have been  able  to  produce  an  up  to  date  police  identity  card,
    especially as on the claimant's account they did not lose  touch  until
    well into 2020.  The letter purporting to be from  the  cousin's  boss,
    and the 2015 identity card, are not sufficient to establish that he  is
    still in post, if he ever held such a post.   I  reject  all  of  these
    documents as unreliable and probably forged.

92. I also reject the claimant's account that he has lost contact with  his
    immediate family members in the manner alleged.  His  earlier  accounts
    indicated that he  was  in  direct  contact  with  his  family  members
    independently of his contact with the cousin, although now he  says  it
    was always on the cousin's social media and/or mobile phone.

93. I do not accept that the claimant lacks access to his CSID or does  not
    remember the relevant details.  He did not have it with him on  arrival
    but he is in touch with his family members, as I have found,  and  they
    would be able to send it to him, or remind him of the relevant details.



94. That brings me to the risk on return  under  SMO  and  others  and  AAH
    (Iraq). It is not in dispute that the claimant is an  Iraqi  Kurd  from
    Tobzawa in the Kirkuk Governorate.  On his  evidence,  his  family  has
    also lived near Erbil during the Iran-Iraq  war,  and  are  now  living
    about half an hour east of Kirkuk.

95. In SMO and others, the Upper Tribunal held that an Iraqi  national  not
    from the IKR will be returned to Baghdad, but that return will  not  be
    possible if the person does not have either a  current  or  an  expired
    Iraqi passport or a laissez passer.

96. Crucially, at [9] and [10] of the guidance, the Upper Tribunal held  as
    follows:

    "9.  In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in  HF  (Iraq)  and
        Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
        1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed  by
        reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence  of  a
        current or expired Iraqi  passport  or  a  Laissez  passer,  if  the
        Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on  account
        of a lack of any of those documents.
    10.  Where P is returned  to  Iraq  on  a  Laissez  Passer  or  expired
        passport, P will be at no risk of  serious  harm  at  the  point  of
        return by reason of not having a current passport."
97. In relation to the CSID and INID documents, which allow internal travel
    within Iraq, the Upper Tribunal in SMO and others said this:
    "C.    CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION
    11.    The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric  Iraqi  National
        Identity Card - the INID.  As a general matter, it is necessary  for
        an individual to have one of these two documents in  order  to  live
        and travel within Iraq without encountering treatment or  conditions
        which are contrary to Article 3 ECHR.   Many of the  checkpoints  in
        the country are manned by Shia militia who are not controlled by the
        GOI and are unlikely to permit an individual without a  CSID  or  an
        INID  to  pass.   A  valid  Iraqi  passport  is  not  recognised  as
        acceptable proof of identity for internal travel.
    12.    A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the  absence  of  a
        CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is not,  in  any
        event,  a  recognised  identity  document.   There  is  insufficient
        evidence to show that returnees are  issued  with  a  'certification
        letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any such document  would
        be recognised internally as acceptable proof of identity.
    13.    Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID  within  Iraq,
        replacement  CSIDs   remain   available   through   Iraqi   Consular
        facilities.   Whether  an  individual  will  be  able  to  obtain  a
        replacement CSID whilst in the UK depends on the documents available
        and, critically, the availability of the volume and  page  reference
        of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq, which system  continues  to
        underpin the Civil Status Identity process.  Given the importance of
        that  information,  most  Iraqi  citizens  will  recall   it.   That
        information may also be obtained from family members, although it is
        necessary to consider whether such relatives are on the father's  or
        the mother's side because the registration system is patrilineal.
    14.    Once in Iraq, it remains the case that an individual is expected
        to attend their local CSA office in order to  obtain  a  replacement
        document.  All CSA offices have now re-opened, although  the  extent
        to which records have been destroyed by the conflict  with  ISIL  is
        unclear, and is likely to vary significantly depending on the extent
        and intensity of the conflict in the area in question.
    15.    An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is not likely  to
        be able to obtain a replacement document there,  and  certainly  not
        within a reasonable time.   Neither  the  Central  Archive  nor  the
        assistance facilities for IDPs are likely  to  render  documentation
        assistance to an undocumented returnee.
    16.    The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity  document  by
        the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return  to  Iraq,  has
        reduced due to the introduction of the INID  system.   In  order  to
        obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local CSA office  in
        person to enrol their biometrics, including  fingerprints  and  iris
        scans.  The CSA offices in which INID terminals have been  installed
        are unlikely - as a result of the phased  replacement  of  the  CSID
        system - to issue a CSID, whether to an individual in person or to a
        proxy.   The reducing number of CSA offices in which INID  terminals
        have not been installed will continue to issue CSIDs to  individuals
        and their proxies upon production of the necessary information."
98. I have not believed the claimant's account of being  unable  to  recall
    the details of his CSID, or to receive it from Iraq, where the rest  of
    his family still lives.  He could  apply  to  the  Iraqi  Consulate  in
    London for a replacement CSID, if his family cannot send it to him.   I
    note that he also has a passport which he says he left at  home,  which
    could be sent to him.

99. The claimant's evidence is that there is an operational INID machine in
    Kirkuk, which  is  a  formerly  contested  area.   However,  I  am  not
    satisfied to the lower standard that the claimant is perceived to  have
    a ISIL link, as I have found that in April 2016, he was not in Iraq and
    that the events relied upon as  leading  to  an  arrest  warrant  being
    issued, did not take place and that the arrest  warrant  documents  are
    unreliable.   The claimant's family members have  been  living  just  a
    half hour drive to the east of Kirkuk for some time now, and  he  could
    rejoin them.  They would be under a cultural obligation  to  offer  him
    hospitality and support his reintegration.

100.  Given that I have found no risk to him in Kirkuk, there is  no  reason
    why on return he could not attend and obtain an INID there.

101. If I am wrong about the  risk  in  the  Kirkuk  Governorate,  there  is
    another alternative home area.  The claimant lived in Erbil for 5 years
    when young.  It is not explained in his evidence what the family  links
    were to Erbil, or whether they still exist, but he may be  entitled  to
    be treated as a returning resident of the IKR and be able to  be  flown
    straight to an airport in the IKR (Erbil  or  Sulaymaniyah),  where  he
    would be safe.  That is not an unreasonable internal relocation  option
    for this claimant. He would benefit from the possibility of a Voluntary
    Returns Scheme grant and has skills in car mechanics which would enable
    him to obtain employment there.

102. For all of the above reasons, the claimant's  international  protection
    claim must fail, both under the Refugee Convention, and on humanitarian
    protection grounds.  No Article 15(c) claim has been established.    On
    the facts of this appeal, the Article  3  ECHR  claim  falls  with  the
    international protection claims.

103. Article 8 ECHR is not  argued  in  the  claimant's  Counsel's  skeleton
    argument.  For the avoidance of doubt, there  is  no  evidence  of  any
    particular connection to or integration in the United Kingdom.   I  can
    give little weight to any private life developed in the United  Kingdom
    since his arrival here in May 2016 (section  117B(4)  and  (5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended))  and  it  is
    not suggested that he has developed any family life here.

104. There is nothing in  the  evidence  to  suggest  that  there  would  be
    significant obstacles to reintegration, with the help of a CSID and his
    family members, or that there are  any  exceptional  circumstances  for
    which leave to remain should be granted outside the Rules.

105. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.

DECISION

106. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      15
December 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



