

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13327/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 October 2017                    |On 01 December 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                    [B R]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with  the
   permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") which was sent to the  parties
   on 1 February 2017, whereupon it dismissed the claimant's appeal  against
   a decision of the Secretary of State of  25  October  2016,  refusing  to
   grant him international protection.

2. By way of brief background the claimant, who was born on 1 January  1997,
   is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity. He claims to be from  a  part
   of Iraq which is just outside the  territory  under  Kurdish  rule  ("the
   KRG")  and  which  is  located  in  a  "contested   area".   In   seeking
   international protection he asserted that he was at risk in Iraq  at  the
   hands of the Jaff tribe in consequence of a claimed land dispute. He also
   asserted a fear  of  the  organisation  sometimes  called  Islamic  State
   ("IS"). But the respondent did not find the claimant to be  credible  and
   did not consider, therefore, that he had made out his claim.

3. The tribunal heard  the  claimant's  appeal  on  24  January  2017.  Both
   parties were  represented  and  he  gave  oral  evidence.  In  a  careful
   determination the tribunal explained why it too disbelieved much  of  his
   account. Crucially, the tribunal decided, notwithstanding what he had  to
   say about his origins and home area, that he had actually  been  born  in
   the KRG and had lived there safely for all of his life until he  came  to
   the UK. So it followed, said the tribunal, that he  could  safely  return
   there. That meant it was  not  necessary  for  it  to  consider  whether,
   notwithstanding what it found to be his untruthfulness about his claim to
   be at risk, it would or would not be unduly harsh for him  to  internally
   relocate away from a "contested area". But the  tribunal  did  say  that,
   were he not from the KRG, he would be returned to Baghdad and that, given
   his personal circumstances and the lack of any  support  in  Baghdad,  it
   would be unduly harsh to expect him to  permanently  relocate  there.  Of
   course, though, given the tribunal's primary finding as to his being from
   the KRG that did not impact upon the outcome.

4. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  followed.
   Although initially refused, permission was eventually granted by a  Judge
   of the Upper  Tribunal.  In  consequence,  a  hearing  before  the  Upper
   Tribunal was arranged so the question of whether or not the tribunal  had
   erred in law could be considered. Representation at that hearing  was  as
   indicated above and I am grateful to each representative.

5. Mr Hussain sought  to  build  upon  the  written  grounds  which  he  had
   drafted. Mr Diwnycz said that he would  concede  that  the  tribunal  had
   erred regarding the adequacy of its consideration as  to  the  claimant's
   origins. Put another way, I suppose what was  being  said  was  that  its
   reasoning as to why it found he was from the KRG had been inadequate.

6. I have, earlier in this decision, described the  tribunal's  decision  as
   being careful. It is. But Mr Diwnycz, a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
   Officer, concedes an error before me and specifies what he considers that
   error to be. I suppose I am not bound by that but such concession from  a
   Senior Home Office Presenting Officer is difficult to ignore. There  was,
   effectively before me, no dispute about the matter between the parties.

7. In the circumstances described above I have  decided  it  is  appropriate
   given the agreement before me for me to set aside the tribunal's decision
   on the basis of the agreed error. That is what I do. I have  also  issued
   some brief directions which may be varied or  replaced  but  which  might
   assist, to a degree, with the rehearing which will now have to follow.

Directions

    A. Since the decision of the tribunal has been set aside,  there  shall
       be  a  complete  rehearing  of  the  appeal  before  a   differently
       constituted tribunal.

    B. The rehearing shall have a time estimate of three  hours.  It  shall
       take place at the Bradford Hearing Centre.  The  claimant  shall  be
       provided with a Kurdish Sorani speaking interpreter.

    C. Nothing shall be preserved from the findings and conclusions of  the
       First-tier Tribunal as contained in its decision sent to the parties
       on 1 February 2017.

    D. Either party may submit further documentary material which  has  not
       previously been  sent  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper
       Tribunal. However, any such material should be received by the First-
       tier Tribunal at Bradford at least ten working  days  prior  to  the
       date which will be fixed for the rehearing. When  such  material  is
       sent  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by   a   party,   copies   must
       simultaneously be sent to that parties opponent.  Any  such  written
       material must be in the form of an indexed and paginated bundle.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The case  is  remitted
for a complete rehearing before a differently constituted tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made. None had been made previously and  none  was
sought before me.

                       Signed

                                                   M       R       Hemingway

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                           Date                                           30
November 2017

Fee Award

I make no fee award.

                       Signed

                                                   M       R       Hemingway

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                           Date                                           30
November 2017
