
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13461/2017
     PA/13464/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                           |On 7 February 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   ms r K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                             First Appellant
                                     And

                                   ms M k
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V. Easty, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Both Appellants are citizens of Albania. The second Appellant,  at  the
    time of the hearing, was the twenty-one-year-old daughter of the  first
    Appellant. Dependent upon the first Appellant's appeal were  two  other
    children who did not have appeal rights.

 2. The Appellants appealed a decision  of  the  Respondent  refusing  them
    international protection. Their appeals were  heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal M. K. P. Davies who, in a decision dated 30 October
    2018, dismissed them.

 3. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Doyle on 5 December 2018. His reasons for so
    granting were: -

         "1.  The Appellants seek permission to appeal against a Decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M K P Davies) who, in a Decision and
         Reasons promulgated on 8/11/2018, dismissed their  appeals  against
         the Secretary of State's decision to reject their protection claim.

         2.   The appellants had until 22/11/2018 to  lodge  an  application
         for permission to appeal. The applications for permission to appeal
         were  not  received  until  26/11/2018.  I  have   considered   the
         principles set out in R(on the  application  of  Onowu)  First-tier
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)(extension  of  time  for
         appealing: principles) IJR [2016] UKUT 185 (IAC).

         3.   The appellants' solicitors believe the application is made  in
         time. They have miscalculated the days of  appeal.  The  appellants
         should not be held responsible for  their  solicitor's  mistake.  I
         extend time. And allow the applications to  be  received,  although
         late.

         4.   The grounds argue that, having found that the  appellants  are
         victims of domestic violence, the Judge's  assessment  of  risk  on
         return, internal relocation and the risk of trafficking  on  return
         are all fundamentally flawed.

         5.   At [100] of the decision the  Judge  accepts  the  appellants'
         account of domestic abuse, and turns her  mind  to  sufficiency  of
         protection. Between [101] and [111] the Judge considers  an  expert
         report,  which  supports  the  appellants,   and   the   background
         materials. It is arguable that the Judge does not fully explain her
         rejection of the expert's conclusions.  It  is  arguable  that  the
         Judge does not consider internal relocation."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. Both parties accepted that there was no challenge to the factual matrix
    found by the Judge.

 6. Ms Easty submitted that the Judge has however, gone on to  err  in  the
    assessment of risk with reference to internal protection, risk in  home
    area, relocation, treatment on return and  the  relevance  of  risk  of
    trafficking.

 7. She began by referring me to paragraph 102 of the Judge's decision.  It
    states: -

         "102.    She goes on to assert that the Appellants (and  M  and  B)
         will be vulnerable to trafficking  although  they  had  never  been
         trafficked in the past and fearing being trafficked has never  been
         part of their case. No reference to a claim  based  on  a  fear  of
         trafficking is made in the representations from Duncan Lewis  dated
         1st August 2016 at page D1 of the bundle. Neither of the Appellants
         assert a fear of being trafficked in their witness  statements.  It
         is not trafficking that they fear but  further  domestic  abuse  by
         their husband/ father."

 8. 6prepared by Antonia Young dated 25 September 2018.

 9. That report states, amongst other things, that irrespective of what has
    happened to them as females with no  man  to  account  for  their  good
    standing it would be assumed that both Appellants were the  victims  of
    trafficking or prostitutes, with all the stigma attached to such labels
    by  everyone  including  state  officials.  Whilst   not   victims   of
    trafficking they would nonetheless be perceived  as  such.  Ms  Easty's
    submission, and I agree with it,  is  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to
    consider this expert evidence on the issue of perceived trafficking and
    has in fact, at  paragraph  102,  of  her  decision  misunderstood  the
    Appellants' claim.

10. The Judge has failed to adequately reason why the expert  evidence  was
    not considered and particularly in the context  of  the  somewhat  aged
    country  guidance.  For  example,  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    extremely limited offer of protection  in  only  four  cases  that  the
    expert report writer had heard of during the last  twenty  years.   The
    Judge  should  have  appreciated  that  this   was   a   report   drawn
    substantially from similar referenced sources to the  Respondent's  own
    country information.

11. The Judge, when looking at internal protection, also erred  in  failing
    to consider the reality of police protection in Albania for victims  of
    domestic violence. In relation to  risk  in  the  home  area  erred  in
    failing to consider whether the Appellants would be safe or  in  danger
    and the risk of further domestic violence at the  hands  of  the  first
    Appellant's husband and the potential for forced marriage of the second
    Appellant. As to internal relocation the Judge has failed  to  consider
    if it was unsafe in the Appellants' home area and whether it  would  be
    reasonable for them to relocate. In so doing she  has  failed  to  take
    account of the expert evidence to be found at page 21  of  the  report.
    Beyond that the Judge has also failed to consider  whether  the  second
    Appellant would be able to negotiate the Albanian procedures to  access
    protection. Finally, in relation to treatment on return the  Judge  has
    again erred in considering the Appellants' return to Albania as "shamed
    women" and has failed to consider whether  it  amounts  to  a  material
    consideration in relation to risk on return.

12. Mr Howells urged me to accept that there was no material  error  within
    the Judge's decision whatsoever. The Judge has considered the issue  of
    state protection including within the home are of the  Appellants.  The
    Judge has looked at real risk at the hands  of  the  first  Appellant's
    husband. The Judge has carefully  analysed  at  paragraph  109  of  the
    decision whether the Appellants'  personal  circumstances  demonstrated
    that they would be unable to access such protection as is available  if
    requested. The Judge was entitled to find that if abuse was  once  more
    reported to the police there was no  suggestion  that  they  would  not
    investigate and prosecute if there was enough evidence  to  do  so.  Ms
    Easty's submissions ignore the Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
    availability of state protection including shelters. The appeal was not
    advanced on the issue of the Appellants being at risk consequent upon a
    perception of having been trafficked.

13. This is an appeal where the Judge has accepted the Appellants'  account
    of  domestic  abuse.  The  issue  of  sufficiency  of  protection   was
    considered. However, I find the Judge  has  inadequately  reasoned  her
    rejection of the expert evidence and the conclusions  made  within  the
    report. In so doing  there  is  consequent  lack  of  consideration  of
    internal relocation.

14. For the reasons put forward in the grounds there  is  here  a  material
    error of law.

15. Ms Easty urged me to remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    preserving the factual matrix and for  the  issue  of  risk  on  return
    including internal relocation alone to be freshly considered. That is a
    course I intend adopting.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

The decision is set aside. However, the factual matrix is preserved and  the
only issue for fresh consideration is  that  of  risk  on  return  including
internal relocation.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh
pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
Act 2007 and Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside  from  Judge  M.
K. P. Davies.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                     Date  6  February
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
