


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/13661/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21 September 2018            |On 26 September 2018             |
|                                  |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    R. M.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicito, Iris Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
           illegally on an unknown date in 2015, and claimed asylum on  the
           basis that he faced a real risk of harm at the hands of  members
           of his family, and, Daesh  in  his  home  area  of  Kirkuk.  The
           Respondent refused that claim on 15 December 2017.
        2. An appeal against the decision to refuse a protection claim  was
           heard and dismissed by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cope  in  a
           decision promulgated on 20 February 2018. In the course of  that
           decision the Judge concluded that the Appellant had not told him
           the truth. He rejected as untrue the claim  that  the  Appellant
           was at risk from members of his family, and concluded that  with
           their assistance he could return to Iraq via Baghdad, and make a
           life for himself in safety in the KRG.
        3. Permission to appeal was granted against the decision  of  Judge
           Cope by First tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 13 April 2018 on  the
           basis the Judge had arguably made a procedural error. Since  the
           Respondent had not formally  placed  in  issue  the  Appellant's
           claim to have been born in Kirkuk, it was arguable that  it  was
           not open to the Judge to find that he was not.
        4. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule 15(2A) for permission
           to rely upon further evidence.
        5. Thus the matter came before me.


      The hearing
        6. When the appeal was called on for  hearing  Ms  Brakaj  accepted
           that the only  challenge  raised  in  the  grounds  was  to  the
           decision upon the humanitarian protection  appeal.  The  adverse
           credibility findings concerning the risk  of  harm  said  to  be
           faced by the Appellant from  members  of  his  family  were  not
           challenged, and must stand.
        7. As Ms Brakaj accepted,  the  difficulty  with  the  grounds  (as
           drafted) is that the author has entirely failed to  engage  with
           the  fact  that  the  Judge  approached  the  question  of   the
           Appellant's origins within Iraq in  the  alternative.  Thus,  in
           paragraphs 97-106 of his decision he dealt with the  Appellant's
           ability to relocate to the KRG to avoid  the  risk  of  harm  he
           faced in his home area, from an internal armed conflict, if that
           home area were Kirkuk. (If his home area were the  KRG,  as  the
           Judge believed to be the case, then the question  of  relocation
           to avoid the risk of internal armed  conflict  in  the  area  of
           Kirkuk did not arise, because there was no such conflict  within
           the KRG.)
        8. Nor has the author of the grounds engaged with  the  Appellant's
           own claim at interview to have lived in the KRG in the  past  in
           the course of his employment.
        9. Nor has the author of the grounds engaged with the fact that the
           Respondent made no formal concession of the Appellant's claim to
           have been born in Kirkuk - the only formal concessions made were
           that he is a Sunni, a Kurd, and a citizen of Iraq [RFR]. It  was
           therefore always for the Appellant to establish where  his  home
           area in  Iraq  had  been  from  time  to  time,  albeit  to  the
           applicable low standard of proof.
       10. It follows that I dismiss the appeal. The  Judge's  decision  is
           consistent with the current country guidance to be found in  AAH
           (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212  and
           AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and BA (Returns to  Baghdad)  Iraq
           CG [2017] UKUT 18.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 20
   February 2018 contained  no  error  of  law  in  the  dismissal  of  the
   Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set  aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 21 September 2018

