
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13284/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 December 2018                         |On 13 December 2018           |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     SKA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                 Appellant
                                    -and-
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                              Respondent

Representation:
Appellant:    Mr. F. Magennis of counsel, instructed by the Migrant Legal
                    Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.   The Respondent is a national of Iran. He arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 30 July 2016, at the age  of  16,  as  an  unaccompanied  child  and
    applied for asylum. His application was refused on  30  November  2017,
    when he was still a child. He appealed and his appeal was  heard  on  6
    April 2018. By this time the Appellant had turned 18.  His  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly in a decision  promulgated
    on 20 April 2018.

2.   The Appellant appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Blundell  granted
    him permission to appeal on 15 May 2018.  The Respondent filed  a  Rule
    24 Response on 10 July 2018 which submitted  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Solly had directed herself to all the relevant evidence and  that
    there were no errors of law in her decision.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   Counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  both
    made oral submissions and I have referred to these  submissions,  where
    relevant, in my findings below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   The Respondent did not dispute that the Appellant's age or that he  was
    a national of Iran and was of Kurdish ethnicity.

5.   As noted by the Home Office Presenting Office, in paragraph  8  of  her
    decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly reminded herself that, as the
    Appellant had been a child until very recently and because  the  events
    which were said to have led to his flight from Iran  occurred  when  he
    was still a child, it would be appropriate to treat him as a vulnerable
    witness for the purposes of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note. No. 2
    of 2010 and Practice Direction of  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal  on
    "Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive witness", dated 30 October 2008.



6.   As a  consequence,  she  directed  that  the  questions  asked  of  the
    Appellant should be as brief as possible and should be "open" in nature
    and that he could request breaks if he needed to do so.  The  Appellant
    does not dispute that the manner in which the appeal was conducted  was
    in accordance with this guidance or that the  Respondent  had  accepted
    corrections to the interview record made by the Appellant's  solicitor.
    However, he did submit that  when  considering  the  substance  of  the
    Appellant's appeal the fact that he had still been a child at the  time
    of the events which  led  to  him  leaving  Iran  had  not  been  given
    appropriate weight in accordance with this guidance.

7.   When the events relied upon took place in Iran occurred  and  when  the
    Appellant was interviewed, he was still a child. Therefore,  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines on  International  Protection:  Child  Asylum  Claims  under
    Articles 1(A)2 and 1(F) of the 1951  Convention  and/or  1967  Protocol
    relating to the Status of Refugees were of relevance. They state that:

     "[72] Children cannot be expected to  provide  adult-like  accounts  of
    their experiences. They may have difficulty articulating their fear for
    a range of reasons, including trauma, parental  instructions,  lack  of
    education, fear or State authorities or persons in positions of  power,
    use of ready-made testimony by smugglers, or fear of reprisals.

     [73] Although the  burden  of  proof  is  usually  shared  between  the
    examiner and the applicant in adult claims, it may be necessary for  an
    examiner to assume a greater burden  of  proof  in  children's  claims,
    especially in the child concerned is unaccompanied".

8.   In the current case the Appellant was unaccompanied and,  as  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer accepted at the hearing, he had never had the
    opportunity to attend school, as a school was only established  in  his
    home area after he would have been eligible to attend.  The  Respondent
    also speculated about the Appellant's parents' intentions but  did  not
    base this on any evidence.

9.   In paragraph 68 of her decision, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Solly  did
    state that "she had borne in mind the appellant's age at  the  time  of
    the events claimed, his SEF and the AIR and she provided details of his
    age at different stages of the  proceedings  at  paragraph  50  of  her
    decision. However, when analysing the content of the Appellant's asylum
    interview  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Solly  she  did  not  give  any
    indication of giving any weight to the fact that he was a child at  the
    time. For example, she relied on the fact that, in reply to question 68
    of his asylum interview, the  Appellant  referred  to  his  two  fellow
    smugglers as "two people  known  to  [his]  father"  and  in  reply  to
    question 72 he confirmed that they were "work colleagues" but  that  in
    paragraph 3 of  his  witness  statement,  dated  2  December  2016,  he
    referred to them as "friends".  This  was  a  small  discrepancy  which
    could have arisen from errors in translation as different  interpreters
    would have been used for the interview and for a statement prepared  by
    his own legal representatives.

10.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly did not consider any  possible  reasons
    for the discrepancy but merely noted that if there had been an error in
    translation, the Appellant should  have  made  a  complaint  about  his
    solicitors, which he had not done.  The Appellant was a child  at  this
    time and, as he had no-one with parental  responsibility  for  him,  he
    lacked legal capacity to give instructions on  his  own.  This  was  in
    marked contrast to the appellant in MM and others (Out of time appeals)
    Burundi [2004] UKAIT 00182, who was an adult.

11.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also  relied  on  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had only mentioned a  few  security  measures  taken  by  the
    Appellant and his companions to evade  the  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities; namely travelling at  night,  staying  off  the  road  and
    keeping the mules quiet.    This was despite the fact that in  response
    to question 92 of the asylum interview,  the  Appellant  had  confirmed
    that they had used look-outs and that the answer that  he  gave,  as  a
    child, to question 93 did not necessarily contradict that this was  the
    case.  The note of the hearing provided by counsel  for  the  Applicant
    also confirmed that the Appellant had said in oral evidence  that  "the
    other tour guides were with me, they were sometimes going in  front  to
    see if everything is OK and nobody is around". This is confirmed by the
    record of proceedings which stated that his answer was "other two  guys
    with me. Sometimes would to in front to make sure no-one is around".

12.  The Appellant was still a child and a vulnerable witness  at  the  time
    of this interview and care should have been taken  to  ensure  that  he
    understood any question so that he could  give  a  sufficiently  cogent
    answer and weight should have been given to the fact that a  child,  as
    opposed to an adult, may not have had the  same  understanding  of  the
    need for additional security measures.

13.  In addition, when summarising her credibility findings in paragraph  77
    of her decision, although First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly  acknowledged
    the Appellant's age at the start of the paragraph, she did not moderate
    her specific findings in any way to reflect the fact that he had been a
    child. In particular, she did not give any weight to the fact  that  he
    said in oral evidence, as confirmed in the record of proceedings,  that
    he did not know the route as he had "never been in front. The other two
    guys were in front finding the routes".

14.  In contrast, the fact that the Appellant had been a child  when  acting
    as a smuggler was used as a basis for doubting the credibility  of  his
    account. For example, at paragraph 64 of her  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge stated that "Mr.  Baker  point  out  that  at  A33  [97]
    someone under the age of 18 would be carrying goods illegally and, as a
    minor, was at greater risk to the group and so even less likely  to  be
    involved in smuggling". She did not  take  into  account  that  it  was
    stated at paragraph 62 of the expert report that one per  cent  of  the
    Kulbaran who had been killed by  the  authorities  were  under  18.  In
    addition, in his evidence the Appellant explained that he  had  had  to
    become a smuggler in order to support his family when his father became
    too ill to continue in this "trade".

15.  At the hearing the Respondent had accepted that if  the  Appellant  had
    come to the attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities,  as  someone  who
    smuggled alcohol and Christian books into Iran, he would be at risk  of
    persecution on return.

16.  It is also  the  Appellant's  case  that  his  Kurdish  ethnicity  will
    increase his risk of persecution. Contrary to the submissions  made  by
    the Home Office Presenting Officer, he did not assert that  he  was  at
    risk of persecution per se on account of his Kurdish ethnicity but  did
    submit that it increased his risk of persecution. It was also never his
    case  that  he  had  been  politically  active  in  Iran.  But  in  the
    conclusions of his expert report, Roya  Kashefi  found  that  smuggling
    alcohol is a codified offence and that smuggling a bible into  Iran  is
    seen as a threat to national security.

17.  One example of the persecution that he may attract on  account  of  his
    ethnicity and his activities was the fact that many  Kurdish  smugglers
    were shot on  sight  instead  of  being  arrested  and  prosecuted.  In
    relation to risk on return, in paragraph 48 of his expert report,  Roya
    Kashefi, also stated that:

     "The manner in which young Kurdish men are treated  when  detained  has
    been widely reported in numerous international  human  rights  reports.
    Use  of  force,  beatings,  ill  treatment  and  even  torture   during
    interrogations undermine Iran's own  national  laws  and  international
    obligations".

18.  When considering whether the  Appellant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution, First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly also failed to  take  into
    account the Country Information and Guidance on Iran: Kurds and Kurdish
    Political Parties, Version 2.0, July 2016, which stated that:

      "5.2.11  In  January  2016  Kurdistan  Human  Rights  Network   (KHRN)
    published a report on the violation of Kolber  workers  in  Iran.   The
    report  stated  that  'Kolber  is  a  Kurdish  name  for  workers   and
    tradespersons, who for a  small  sum  of  money  risk  their  lives  to
    transport packs of various foreign items on their own back  or  on  the
    back of horses to transfer them from and to Iranian border  territories
    from border areas of neighbouring Kurdish regions in Iraq and Turkey.'

     5.2.12 The report went on to state that:  'The  Kolber  workers  mostly
    come from Kurdish border villages and towns,  where  they  are  usually
    left with no job other than Kolber work  to  make  a  small  income  to
    survive through the harsh reality of the deprived Kurdish border areas.
    However, the Iranian government describes them  as  "smugglers",  while
    Iranian soldiers and border guards  deliberately  shoot  to  kill  them
    across the border areas.'

     5.2.13 Jane's 'Sentinel  Security  Assessment'  noted  that  'there  is
    growing anger in Iran's Kurdish community  over  the  number  of  Kurds
    executed in Iran amid allegations that torture is widespread."

19.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted  that  the  expert  report
    only confirmed that drug smugglers would be persecuted by  the  Iranian
    authorities. But in paragraph 60 of the report, the expert also  relied
    on the extract from the Kurdistan  Human  Rights  Network  referred  to
    above.

20.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also failed to  take  into  account  that
    paragraph 2.3.2 of the Country Information and Guidance on Iran:  Kurds
    and Kurdish Political Parties,  Version  2.0,  July  2016  stated  that
    although "...in general, the level of discrimination faced by Kurds  in
    Iran is not such that it will reach the level of being  persecutory  or
    otherwise inhuman or degrading treatment. This  was  confirmed  in  the
    country guidance case of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker
    (CG) [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) (29 June 2016) where the Tribunal held  that
    although the evidence does not show that there is a risk  to  returnees
    on the basis of Kurdish ethnicity alone "a Kurdish  person  may  be  at
    risk  if  "that  person  is  otherwise  of  interest  to  the   Iranian
    authorities (para 34 of determination").

21.  Instead, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  relied  on  an  Ekurd  Daily
    article, mentioned in paragraph 28 of the Respondent's  refusal  letter
    which stated that "every month Iranian border guards  shoot  dozens  of
    poor Kurdish people for trying to smuggle goods across the border  from
    Iraqi Kurdistan".  She did not take into account the rest of the  quote
    which stated that the "authorities ignore complaints  by  relatives  of
    victims who allege their loved  ones  were  killed  without  reason  or
    proper warning".  It went on to assert that "the courts don't conduct a
    thorough investigation.  Oftentimes,  they  categorise  the  victim  as
    criminal, saying he  deserved  what  he  got  because  he  ignored  the
    police".

22.  It is also the case  that  when  considering  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly failed to give any,
    or any sufficient weight, to the country  and  expert  evidence,  which
    confirmed the plausibility of the Appellant's account. For example,  in
    part two of the expert report, Roya Kashefi  confirmed  that  the  area
    from which the Appellant came is within a well-known area for smuggling
    and that there is an unofficial market at Qasmarash. She also confirmed
    that due to the economic plight of the Kurdish community  many  had  to
    resort      to       smuggling       to       support       themselves.











23.  In paragraph 77 of her decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  lists
    her reasons for finding  the  Appellant's  account  incredible  and  in
    paragraph  88  she  stated  that  "in  reaching  this  conclusion  have
    considered all of the evidence holistically and bearing in mind the low
    standard of proof". However, it is clear from the content of  paragraph
    87 of the decision that she had  not  taken  into  account  the  expert
    evidence before reaching such a holistic decision, as she  stated  that
    "the expert predicates her evidence on the appellant's account  of  his
    activities which I reject as I have not accepted that the appellant was
    engaged in smuggling".  This  was  an  approach  which  was  explicitly
    rejected in Karanakaran v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2000] EWCA Civ 11.

24.  For all of these reasons the decision reached  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Solly contained errors of law and must be set aside.


Decision

(1)  The appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Solly or Blundell.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 10 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



