
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13558/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 August 2019                             |On 5 September 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                  Mr t v n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gulliver-Andrew, Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 21 May 2019 of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro which refused the appellant's asylum  and  human
    rights appeal.

 2. The background to this matter is that the appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Vietnam born in 2000.  He came to the UK illegally on 17 July 2016.  In
    a decision dated 22 November 2018 the respondent refused his protection
    and human rights claim.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is that whilst  in  Vietnam  he  was
    involved with the Viet Tan Party (VTP).  He maintains that  on  11  May
    2014 he took part in a demonstration outside  the  Chinese  Embassy  in
    Hanoi. The applicant claims that he and his paternal uncle,  with  whom
    he lived, were arrested and detained overnight  at  a  police  station.
    They were released having signed a declaration that they would not take
    part in any future demonstrations.

 4. The appellant also maintained that on 10 April 2016 five people came to
    his home for a meeting with his uncle.  His uncle told him that it  was
    a meeting of the VTP.  The appellant asked if he could become a  member
    of the party but his uncle advised him that he could not do so until he
    was an adult but that  he  could  support  the  party  by  distributing
    leaflets in secret.   The  appellant  maintained  that  he  go  out  to
    distribute leaflets with his uncle on 1 May 2016.  Whilst he was  doing
    so he saw two police officers approach his uncle and his uncle told him
    to run.  His uncle was detained but the appellant  managed  to  escape.
    He went to the home of his uncle's friend who assisted him to leave the
    country.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro did not find the appellant's claim to
    be credible, albeit some aspects  of  the  claim  were  accepted.   The
    credibility findings are set out in paragraphs 27 to 55.

 6. In paragraph 37 the judge accepted the appellant's  account  of  having
    attended the demonstration on 4 May 2014 as his account of  this  event
    was corroborated by the country material.  In paragraph  38  the  judge
    also accepted the  arrest  of  the  appellant  and  his  uncle  at  the
    demonstration but did not find that arrest and detention for one  night
    was sufficient  to  show  that  he  had  "become  of  interest  to  the
    authorities."

 7. In paragraph 40 the judge found as follows:

         "40. The appellant's uncle being a member of VTP would  have  known
             of the Vietnam government's position regarding  opposition  to
             its regime.  It is therefore not credible that the appellant's
             uncle would have taken the irresponsible decision to allow the
             appellant to become involved in undertaking  leafleting  which
             would have put him at risk of arrest, detention and a  lengthy
             imprisonment.

         41.  Furthermore, in light  of  the  fact  the  government  uses  a
             variety of methods to keep its citizens under surveillance  in
             order to prevent dissent, it is even less  credible  that  the
             appellant and his uncle would go out to post leaflets  putting
             them through letterboxes not knowing if  a  supporter  of  the
             government lives behind any of these doors  which  would  then
             lead to their arrest."

 8. The judge went on  to  find  that  the  claim  of  leafleting  was  not
    credible.  In paragraph 43 the judge found as follows:

         "43. In fact the appellant has provided no evidence that  satisfies
             me that his uncle is a member of VTP or that he  is  either  a
             member or supporter of the party and as I do not find  him  to
             be a credible witness, I do not accept that  his  uncle  is  a
             member of VTP as he claims."

 9. In paragraphs 44 to 48 the judge finds that the appellant's evidence of
    sur place activity in the UK was very limited, would not  make  him  of
    interest and that, in any event, the country evidence did not show that
    the  authorities  monitored  to  a  sufficiently  high  level  for  the
    appellant to have been identified. In paragraph 51 the judge  concludes
    that the sur place claim did not have merit.

10. In paragraph 53 the judge addressed the expert  report  of  Christopher
    Bluth dated 19 February 2019.  The report is at pages 93 to 125 of  the
    appellant's bundle.  The judge says this in paragraph 53:

         "53. I have not  overlooked  the  appellant's  Expert,  Mr  Bluth's
             report.  I  note  he  has  accepted  the  appellant's  account
             without question but it is the task of the  Tribunal  and  not
             the Expert to decide on the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
             account and I find for the reasons I  have  given,  I  do  not
             accept that the appellant had a political profile  in  Vietnam
             nor has he acquired one since coming  to  the  United  Kingdom
             which would cause him to be  of  interest  to  the  Vietnamese
             authorities."

11. The appellant put forward two main grounds  before  me.   Firstly,  the
    approach to the expert evidence was in error and secondly  the  finding
    on the implausibility of the appellant's uncle assisting him to leaflet
    for the VTP disclosed a further error.

12. Mr Gulliver-Andrews submitted that the report showed  that  the  expert
    did understood his duty to the Tribunal,  understood  that  credibility
    was, ultimately a decision for the  Tribunal  and  did  assess  whether
    parts of the appellant's account was credible. He did not merely accept
    the account at its highest. This was shown,  firstly,  in  paragraph  1
    where the expert set out  that  the  purpose  of  the  report  was  "to
    consider and evaluate" the various claims made by the  client  and  the
    Home Office.  The expert  set  out  his  instructions  which  were  "to
    consider and comment on whether the appellant has  a  genuine  fear  of
    persecution/risk to life on return to Vietnam on account of  her  (sic)
    political  opinion  and  activities".  This  showed  that  the   expert
    understood that he was  required  to  comment  on  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account and not merely take the account at its highest.

13. In section 5.3 the expert considers the Home Office finding that  parts
    of the  appellant's  evidence  were  not  consistent  or  credible.  In
    paragraph 5.3.2, the expert states:

         "5.3.2   The Home Office considers the appellant's account  of  his
             involvement with Viet Tan internally inconsistent because  his
             uncle told the appellant that he could not become a member  of
             Viet  Tan  and  yet  was  sent  out  to  distribute  leaflets.
             Membership of Viet Tan is organised around  local  cells  with
             extreme  secrecy  (given  it  is  designated  as  a  terrorist
             movement) and therefore decisions about  membership  are  made
             locally.  There are many activists who participate in  actions
             by Viet Tan or who are associated with  the  movement  without
             being full members.  There is no obvious reason to support the
             Home Office's contention that the appellant's uncle would  not
             tell him that the activities of Viet Tan were  illegal;  quite
             to the contrary, it could have been a proper warning to induce
             caution.  There is also nothing inconsistent for the appellant
             to be asked to distribute leaflets even if he could not  be  a
             full member due  to  his  age.   The  various  inconsistencies
             alleged by the Home  Office  have  no  basis  in  the  country
             evidence."

14. The expert also assessed the Home Office findings  on  the  appellant's
    claim to have attended a demonstration in 2014:

         "3.3          The Home Office  considers  the  appellant's  account
             externally inconsistent because they claim  that  the  protest
             was "authorised"  and  therefore  questions  that  there  were
             altercations with demonstrators or that  the  appellant  would
             have been arrested.  It is true that the authorities  did  not
             try to prevent the demonstration, but this  is  not  the  same
             thing as being "authorised"  as  it  would  be  in  democratic
             states like the United Kingdom where there is the rule of law.
              It is also the case that there was a very large contingent of
             uniformed and plain clothes police present who were trying  to
             control the event  and  ensure  a  proper  distance  from  the
             Chinese Embassy.  It would be plausible that  there  would  be
             hostile interactions between the police and the  demonstrators
             at various points given the sheer size  of  the  demonstration
             and the fact that the police considered the  demonstrators  to
             be enemies of the state.  I am  personally  aware  of  several
             individuals were arrested at this demonstration, so I consider
             the appellant's account to  plausible.   In  general,  hostile
             interactions between demonstrators and police  are  common  in
             demonstrations in western countries where political protest is
             considered to be a basic right of  citizens.   For  all  these
             reasons, I do not believe that the Home  Office's  claim  that
             the appellant's account is  externally  inconsistent  has  any
             basis in the objective evidence."

15. The expert also commented in paragraph 5.3.7:

         "5.3.7   Pro-democracy  activists  have  sought  to  galvanise  the
                younger population by focusing on  particular  social  issue
                (sic) that they believe will concern young people,  such  as
                political corruption, respect  for  the  rule  of  law,  and
                supporting  farmers  in  the  fight  against   forced   land
                seizures."

16. The expert sets out his  understanding  of  his  role  as  regards  the
    credibility of the appellant's account in paragraphs 5.3.9  and  5.3.10
    of the report:

         "5.3.9   Although I am fully aware  that  credibility  is  for  the
                Tribunal to determine, in my expert opinion the  appellant's
                statement, if accepted, is plausible and her (sic) political
                concerns match with the concerns and activities of Viet Tan.
                 Political demonstrations are illegal in Vietnam  and  these
                are very significant political issues.

         ...

         5.3.10   In my opinion the appellant's statement  is  plausible  in
                that  it  accords  very  well  with  the  country   evidence
                available in the  public  domain  as  to  the  concerns  and
                activities  of  political  activists  in  Vietnam  and   the
                response of the authorities.

          ...

              Although I am aware that credibility is for  the  Tribunal  to
                determine, the appellant's account is plausible in  relation
                to the country evidence."

17. The expert set out the following comments in his conclusion at  section
    6 of the report:

         "6.  Conclusion

         Although I am  aware  that  credibility  is  for  the  Tribunal  to
         determine, in my  expert  opinion  the  appellant's  statement,  if
         accepted,  is  plausible  in  relation  to  the  country  evidence.
         According to his account, the appellant  has  demonstrated  against
         the policies and actions of the Vietnamese government, and this  is
         an act that is always illegal in Vietnam.  He  is  associated  with
         Viet  Tan,  considered  a  terrorist  movement  by  the  Vietnamese
         authorities.  By leaving the country illegally and engaging in what
         are considered  anti-Vietnamese  political  actions  abroad  he  is
         considered to have committed serious criminal offences against  the
         Vietnamese  state.   Persons  involved  in  such  activities   have
         received very serious criminal penalties.  In my expert opinion,  I
         believe that the appellant correctly believes that he faces serious
         risks of long term detention and torture if  forced  to  return  to
         Vietnam."

18. The expert goes on in section 7 of the decision to make  a  declaration
    as to his duties as follows:

         "7.  Declaration

         I hereby declare that I have complied with my duty to the court and
         that all the statements in this report are true to the best  of  my
         knowledge.  I  have  read  the  Ikarian  Reefer  guidelines  and  I
         understand that my duty is only to  the  court  and  not  to  those
         instructing me.  I  understand  that  my  duty  is  to  provide  an
         impartial expert opinion with a view  to  assisting  the  court  in
         reaching its decision, and that my duty is to  the  court  and  not
         those instructing me.  I believe that I  have  complied  with  that
         duty.  The report complies with the obligations on experts in court
         proceedings set out in the Civil Procedure Rules (CPR) 35  and  the
         Practice Directions with particular reference to Part  10  for  the
         Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper
         Tribunal.  I have read the decision of MOJ and  Others  (Return  to
         Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), which at [23] - [27]
         sets out the Tribunal's instructions as to the appointment of (sic)
         expert.  I confirm that, insofar as the facts stated in  my  report
         are within my own knowledge, I have made clear which they are,  and
         I believe them to be true and that the opinions  I  have  expressed
         represent my true and complete  professional  opinion.   I  confirm
         that I have read and understand the requirements placed  on  expert
         witnesses as stated in the Ikarian Reefer case."

19. It is  my  conclusion  that  the  expert  did  not  merely  accept  the
    credibility of the appellant's account at its  highest.  He  considered
    the respondent's view of the appellant's claim  and  indicated  why  he
    found the appellant's claim plausible. He  showed  that  he  understood
    that credibility was for the Tribunal. He showed that he understood his
    duty to the court  and  to  act  impartially  and  professionally.  The
    statement of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  paragraph  53  of  the
    decision that the expert  "accepted  the  appellant's  account  without
    question" is not correct. This was the only reason given for the First-
    tier Tribunal placing no weight on the expert report where, had it been
    considered further, it could have made a  material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  The credibility assessment  must  therefore  be
    set aside for these reasons.

20. Further, the expert also comments on the appellant's claim that he will
    face a risk on return to Vietnam as  he  left  illegally  and  will  be
    returning as a failed asylum seeker.  The expert addressed this part of
    his claim in section 5.4 of the report and sets out  why  he  considers
    that the appellant could be at risk on this basis. In  paragraph  5.4.1
    the expert sets out how returnees are treated which includes them being
    "interrogated by immigration officials" and those having been  returned
    being "asked about where they have been, their activities and  contacts
    abroad, their reasons for return and their destination in Vietnam.   He
    goes on to state:

         "5.4.1    However,  in  the  case  of  failed  asylum  seekers  the
                interrogation will be more thorough and take longer.   There
                is no doubt that asylum seekers (or  returnees  in  general)
                will  be  questioned  or  examined  about  their   political
                loyalties or activities upon  return.   Human  Rights  Watch
                observed  that  during  interrogations  of  returned  asylum
                seekers from Hong Kong  to  Vietnam,  immigration  officials
                show particular interest in asylum seekers who  worked  with
                foreigners or foreign voluntary agencies or engaged in anti-
                communist or other political activities.  It concluded  that
                such "interest indicates a  certain  degree  of  danger  for
                those asylum seekers who have been involved in  these  types
                of activities".

         5.4.2    There is clear evidence that failed asylum seekers can  be
                arrested upon return for alleged crimes  which  can  include
                anti-government  activities.   A  country  report  on  human
                rights practices issued by the US State Department  noted  a
                number of instances in which returning  Vietnamese  citizens
                have been mistreated  by  the  Vietnamese  government  as  a
                result of actual  or  alleged  dissident  activities  and/or
                beliefs were "interrogated extensively by  authorities  upon
                their return"."

21. In paragraph 5.4.4 the expert identifies "various  examples  of  asylum
    seekers being interrogated and arrested on return are  documented"  and
    goes on to provide details of those cases.

22. In paragraph 5.4.10 the expert considers the question of the  appellant
    having left Vietnam illegally.  The opinion of the expert is:

         "For "causing public disorder" alone the appellant is liable for  a
         sentence to lengthy imprisonment.  Under Article  121  of  the  new
         criminal code "any person who, for  the  purpose  of  opposing  the
         people's government, emigrates illegally shall face the penalty  of
         03 - 12 years' imprisonment"."

    Paragraph 17 above sets out the expert's conclusion which includes  his
    opinion that leaving illegally can be a risk factor on return.

23. The First-tier Tribunal did not give any regard to these parts  of  the
    appellant's claim or the expert report commenting on them.  This  is  a
    further reason why the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  discloses
    error on a point of law and must be set aside to be remade.

24. The second ground of appeal concerns  the  finding  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in paragraph 40 of the decision on the implausibility of
    the appellant being unable to join VTP but his uncle suggesting that he
    distribute leaflets with him, the decision characterising this as being
    "irresponsible".  The appellant challenges this finding relying on  the
    case of HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 in which  the  Court  of  Appeal
    found:

         "Inherent probability, which may be helpful in many domestic cases,
         can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate, factor to rely  on
         in some asylum cases."

25. It is uncontentious that people,  including  young  people,  living  in
    states with significantly  adverse  human  rights  profiles  carry  out
    opposition activities such as leafleting notwithstanding the risk.  The
    expert provided support for the appellant being involved in  leafleting
    notwithstanding the serious view that would be taken  on  this  by  the
    Vietnamese authorities. In that context, the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not provide a rational reason for finding the  appellant's  account  of
    leafleting to  lack  credibility.  This  is  a  further  error  in  the
    credibility assessment that requires that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside to be remade.

26. For all of these reasons I find an error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and set it aside to be remade de novo.

27. I was in agreement with the submissions of the parties that where there
    are no preserved findings and completely new findings of fact  must  be
    made it is appropriate here, notwithstanding the guidance  provided  in
    the Senior President's Practice Direction, for the appeal to be  remade
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of
    law and is set aside to be remade.

29. The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 27 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
