
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/13629/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th April 2018                            |On 11th May 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     AQA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Akther of Counsel, instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Thomas of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 26th January 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born  in  February  1980.
    He claimed to have arrived in the UK in March 2005.  He was encountered
    and arrested on 14th October 2006 working illegally at  a  restaurant.
    He claimed asylum having been arrested.  His application for asylum was
    refused on 22nd November 2006  and  he  did  not  appeal  against  that
    decision.  Thereafter he applied  for  leave  to  remain  relying  upon
    Article 8 in September 2009 which application was  refused  in  January
    2010.  He submitted further submissions in September  2013  which  were
    rejected on 1st May 2014.  Fresh submissions were made in  August  2015
    which were rejected on 13th October 2015.  He then made an  application
    for judicial review, which resulted in the Respondent reconsidering the
    submissions which the Appellant had made  on  18th August  2015.   The
    Respondent issued a refusal decision dated 21st November 2016 which the
    Appellant then appealed to the FtT.   The  Appellant  claimed  that  he
    feared persecution by reason of his political opinion, and feared  that
    he would be persecuted and ill-treated if returned to Bangladesh.   The
    Appellant claimed that he had been a member  of  the  Bangladesh  Jatia
    Party (BJP).

 3. The FtT accepted that the Appellant had given a  credible  account  and
    made factual findings at paragraphs 22-29 which are summarised below;

      a) The Appellant held the position of general  secretary  of  the  BJP
         Party in his home area of Biswanath from 2001 to 2004.

      b) The Appellant was the victim of two  attacks  in  Bangladesh  which
         occurred in October and November 2004.  These attacks were  carried
         out by local members of the BNP and Awami League.

      c) Documentary evidence produced by the Appellant, which  he  received
         from Bangladesh, was reliable.

      d) After the Appellant's departure from  Bangladesh  his  family  were
         made the subject of false charges which were found  not  proven  by
         the judicial magistrate.

      e) An arrest warrant has been issued for the Appellant in  Bangladesh.



      f) The Appellant has not had any political involvement with the BJP or
         otherwise since he left Bangladesh in 2005 and  has  not  continued
         his political activities in the UK.

      g) The Appellant's credibility was damaged with reference to section 8
         of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act
         2004 as he entered the UK illegally using a false passport and  did
         not seek to regularise his immigration status for nineteen  months,
         and only then after he was detained for  working  illegally.   This
         behaviour weighs against the Appellant's  credibility  but  is  not
         fatal to his appeal.

      h) The Appellant suffered persecution and serious  harm  in  his  home
         area of Biswanath.

 4. Having made the findings summarised above, the FtT went on to  consider
    whether there was an internal relocation option for the  Appellant  and
    found that there  was.   In  brief  summary  the  FtT  found  that  the
    Appellant's fear was confined to Biswanath, and when he left that  area
    he resided in Dhaka for a period of time without  any  difficulty.   An
    arrest warrant was issued in Sylhet and there was no evidence  that  it
    had been distributed nationwide and in any event the allegation against
    the Appellant was false.  The Appellant  had  no  political  record  of
    involvement since 2005 and it was "reasonably likely that  the  warrant
    may not be executed on return."

 5. The FtT also found that if  the  warrant  was  executed  there  was  no
    evidence to show that the Appellant would be  detained  or  exposed  to
    persecution or serious harm and he had access to  legal  representation
    in Bangladesh.  If the case against him proceeded the FtT found that it
    would fail as the case against his family members had failed.

 6. The FtT also found that the Appellant was not  a  senior  figure  or  a
    political activist and would not be regarded as such on return and  his
    involvement with the BJP in Bangladesh was for a short  period  between
    2001 and 2004.  It was not reasonably  likely  that  he  would  now  be
    considered to pose a threat to the Bangladesh government or the  state.
    It was not reasonably likely that he would still face a threat from the
    Awami League  or  the  BNP  or  the  Bangladesh  government.   The  FtT
    therefore found that the Appellant had a reasonable internal relocation
    option away from Biswanath.  The Appellant applied  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, relying upon two grounds.  Firstly it was
    contended that the FtT had made a perverse finding in  concluding  that
    the Appellant could safely relocate and had failed to  appreciate  that
    the Appellant feared the ruling party in Bangladesh and  therefore  the
    authorities,  including  the  police  would   be   present   throughout
    Bangladesh.  The FtT had not referred  to  any  objective  evidence  to
    support the conclusion that the Appellant would not be targeted because
    of the passage of time.

 7. Secondly it was submitted that the FtT had  erred  by  not  recognising
    that past persecution is evidence of future  risk.   It  was  contended
    that the FtT had failed to provide any adequate reasons for  concluding
    that the Appellant could expect any assistance from the authorities  in
    view of his opposition to them and fear of them.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  Judge  Woodcraft  who
    found;

         "The grounds of onward appeal  argue  that  in  finding  relocation
         feasible the judge has overlooked the fact that the Appellant fears
         the government and thus nowhere in Bangladesh will be safe.  It  is
         arguable that the option of internal  relocation  was  inconsistent
         with the judge's findings of fact.  I note  in  passing  that  [24]
         does not deal with the Respondent's  specific  concerns  about  the
         Appellant's documentation referred to at [14].  All grounds may  be
         argued."

Error of Law

 9. At a hearing on 9th January 2018, on behalf of the  Appellant  reliance
    was placed upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  On behalf of the Respondent it was  argued  that
    the FtT had not erred  in  law  and  had  given  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that there was a reasonable internal relocation option.   On
    behalf of the Appellant it was argued that the FtT had  not  adequately
    considered how the Appellant would be treated if  he  was  returned  to
    Bangladesh and the warrant  of  arrest  executed.   On  behalf  of  the
    Respondent it was pointed out that  the  Appellant's  family  had  been
    falsely accused, and had been acquitted of the  false  charges  against
    them.

10. I found that there was a material error of law in the FtT decision  and
    set that decision aside but preserved the findings which had  not  been
    challenged.  Those findings are contained at paragraphs  22-29  of  the
    FtT decision.  Full details of  the  application  for  permission,  the
    grant of permission, the submissions  made  by  both  parties,  and  my
    conclusions are contained in my error of law  decision  and  directions
    promulgated on 26th January 2018.  I set out below paragraphs 19-23  of
    that decision which contain my conclusions and reasons for setting  the
    FtT decision aside;

         19   I reject the contention that  the  FtT  has  made  a  perverse
             decision, but my view is that the decision discloses an  error
             of law  in  failing  to  follow  the  principles  set  out  in
             Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC)  in
             concluding that there  is  a  reasonable  internal  relocation
             option available to the Appellant.  For ease  of  reference  I
             set out below the head note to Budhathoki;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
             judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a  case.
             This leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused  and
             is not a proportionate approach to  deciding  cases.   It  is,
             however, necessary for judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
             conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and brief terms
             their reasons, so that the parties  can  understand  why  they
             have won or lost.

         20   I do not  find  adequate  reasons  have  been  given  for  the
             conclusion reached in paragraph  31  that  "it  is  reasonably
             likely that the warrant may not be executed on return."  There
             is no consideration of the opinion  given  by  the  lawyer  in
             Bangladesh that  the  Appellant  would  be  arrested  on  that
             warrant.  Therefore no reasons are given for disregarding that
             evidence.

         21   The Appellant fears the state authorities in  Bangladesh,  and
             the FtT does not adequately consider the  point  made  in  the
             Respondent's own guidance note at paragraph 2.3 that in such a
             case internal relocation will not generally be an option.   In
             view of the findings made by the FtT at paragraphs  22-29,  my
             conclusion is that adequate reasons have not  been  given  for
             finding that there is a reasonable internal relocation  option
             in Bangladesh.  I find that the decision of the  FtT  must  be
             set aside.

         22   The decision will need to be re-made.  It is  not  appropriate
             or necessary to remit this appeal to the FtT.  There has  been
             no challenge to the findings made by the FtT at paragraphs 22-
             29 and those findings stand.

         23   There will be a further  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
             restricted to the issue  of  whether  there  is  a  reasonable
             internal relocation option available to the Appellant.

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 26th April 2018

11. At the commencement of the hearing I ascertained that the Tribunal  had
    all the documentation to be relied upon by the parties, and  that  each
    party had served the other with any documentation upon  which  reliance
    was to be placed.   The  Tribunal  had  the  Respondent's  bundle  with
    Annexes A-F, the Appellant's  bundle  comprising  160  pages,  and  the
    Appellant's supplementary bundle comprising 30 pages, all of which  had
    been before the FtT.

12. The Tribunal also had the Respondent's Country Policy  and  Information
    Note on Bangladesh regarding opposition to the government published  in
    January 2018 ( the CPIN) and the Respondent's Country  Information  and
    Guidance on Prison Conditions in Bangladesh  published  in  March  2015
    (the CIG)  These documents had been produced on behalf of the Appellant
    at an earlier hearing on 19th March 2018 which had to be  adjourned  as
    the documents had not been served in accordance with directions.

13. The Tribunal also had further documents submitted by the Respondent and
    these included SH (prison conditions) Bangladesh CG [2008] UKAIT 00076,
    an ICRC annual report on Bangladesh dated 2016, a joint NGO  Report  to
    the UN Human Rights Committee on Bangladesh, and a report on Bangladesh
    by the World Organisation Against Torture.

14. Mrs Akther confirmed that no further oral evidence would be given and I
    therefore heard submissions from both representatives which are set out
    in full in my Record of Proceedings and summarised below.

15. Mrs Akther began her  submissions  by  pointing  out  that  credibility
    findings made by the FtT had been preserved, and that past  persecution
    was a serious indication of a well-founded fear of further persecution.



16. Mrs Akther submitted that if the Appellant returned to  Bangladesh  and
    relocated to an area away from his home area of Biswanath which  is  in
    Sylhet he would be arrested on the arrest warrant that had been issued,
    and he would thereafter  be  detained.   Mrs  Akther  referred  to  the
    Respondent's guidance on prison conditions in Bangladesh at 1.3.5 which
    describes those conditions as harsh and at times life  threatening  due
    to  overcrowding,  lack  of  medical  facilities  and  lack  of  proper
    sanitation contributing to custodial deaths.  Reference was  also  made
    to 1.4 of that guidance which states  that  conditions  may  reach  the
    Article 3 threshold in individual cases, depending  on  the  particular
    circumstances of the person concerned.  Mrs Akther submitted that  this
    applied to the Appellant who would be a political prisoner.

17. While it was accepted that SH Bangladesh is a  country  guidance  case,
    Mrs Akther submitted that due to the passage of time,  I  could  depart
    from the guidance  given  in  that  case,  that  prison  conditions  in
    Bangladesh, at least for ordinary prisoners, do not violate  Article  3
    of the 1950 Convention.

18. I was  referred  to  the  CPIN  on  Opposition  to  the  Government  in
    Bangladesh published in January 2018, which indicates at 2.2.10 that in
    general evidence does not indicate there is a real risk of state or non
    state persecution  or  serious  harm  for  ordinary  party  members  or
    supporters, although  depending  on  their  circumstances  and  profile
    opposition party leaders and activists may face harassment or arbitrary
    arrest and detention.  At 2.2.12 guidance is given that decision makers
    must consider whether there are  particular  factors  specific  to  the
    person which would place them at real risk.

19. I was referred to section 2.3 of the CPIN which  indicates  that  if  a
    person's fear of persecution is by the state they will not be  able  to
    avail themselves of the protection of the authorities.  At 2.4  of  the
    same document it is stated that if the person's fear is of  persecution
    at the hands of the state they may not be able to  relocate  to  escape
    that risk.  Mrs Akther pointed out that at paragraph 34  of  the  joint
    NGO Report to the UN Human Rights Committee, there is reference  to  39
    people being tortured to death in custody between May 2013 and December
    2016.

20. Mr Kotas pointed out that the FtT had found that the Appellant had been
    attacked twice in 2004 in his home area.  Mr Kotas pointed to the  CPIN
    of January 2018 at 4.1.1 which confirms that  Bangladeshi  politics  is
    dominated by two parties, the Awami League (the AL) and the  Bangladesh
    Nationalist Party (the BNP), and the  Appellant  is  not  a  member  of
    either of  those  parties.   The  party  to  which  the  Appellant  had
    belonged, the BJP, is referred to at 4.7.1 as belonging to an  eighteen
    party alliance.  At 4.8.1 it  is  confirmed  that  the  BJP  has  three
    members in the current cabinet in Bangladesh, but is not in a  position
    to challenge either the AL or the BNP.  Mr Kotas pointed  out  that  at
    8.1.2 of the CPIN there is reference to 54 people being killed  and  in
    excess of 3,000 injured  in  political  violence  between  January  and
    August 2017, but at 8.2.1 it is confirmed that victims did not  include
    BJP members.

21. Mr Kotas submitted that the background evidence indicated, taking  into
    account that the two attacks on the Appellant had occurred in 2004  and
    were confined to his home area, that there  was  a  realistic  internal
    relocation option which would not be unduly harsh.

22. Turning to the arrest warrant Mr Kotas submitted  that  the  lawyer  in
    Bangladesh who had written a letter  dated  22nd  June  2017  which  is
    contained at page 21 of the Appellant's bundle,  was  speculating  when
    stating that because a warrant of arrest had been issued, the Appellant
    would be arrested by the police if he returned to Bangladesh.

23. In the  alternative,  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  if  the  warrant  was
    executed, this did not necessarily mean that  the  Appellant  would  be
    detained.  It was open to a  magistrate  to  grant  him  bail.   I  was
    reminded that the judiciary in Bangladesh  had  found  the  Appellant's
    family not guilty of false charges made against them.

24. If the Appellant was remanded into custody having been arrested on  the
    warrant, Mr Kotas submitted that the prison  conditions  in  Bangladesh
    did not breach Article  3  of  the  1950  Convention.   The  background
    evidence indicated that prison conditions in Bangladesh at the  present
    time were no worse than the prison conditions  examined  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in SH Bangladesh and in fact the ICRC  document  at  page  321
    indicated that the Bangladeshi authorities had granted the ICRC  access
    to all places of  detention  in  Bangladesh.   This  was  therefore  an
    indication that conditions were  improving.   At  page  322  there  was
    reference to a total of 9,100 detainees in eight prisons having  better
    living  conditions  after  the   authorities   made   improvements   to
    infrastructure with ICRC technical assistance.

25. I was therefore asked to find that the Appellant did have a  reasonable
    option of internal relocation in Bangladesh, and that even  if  he  was
    detained on the arrest warrant,  prison  conditions  would  not  breach
    Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

26. In response Mrs Akther submitted that SH is an unsafe decision and  did
    not consider the torture of political prisoners.  I was asked  to  find
    that the Appellant  did  not  have  a  reasonable  option  of  internal
    relocation, and he would be detained on the arrest warrant and held  in
    custody and there was a risk that he would be tortured.

27. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

28. The burden of proving that he is entitled to  international  protection
    is on the Appellant.  The standard of  proof  can  be  described  as  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood which is  a  lower  standard  than  the
    normal civil standard of a balance of probabilities.

29. I have to consider whether the Appellant would be at  risk  on  return,
    taking into account the preserved findings made by the FtT,  which  are
    summarised earlier in this decision.  The issue that I have  to  decide
    is whether the Appellant could return to Bangladesh and relocate within
    Bangladesh, to an area other than his home area in Sylhet.

30. The Appellant has previously been attacked in October and November 2004
    in his home area, by local members of the BNP and AL.  The AL now  form
    the government in Bangladesh and have done so since January 2009.   The
    AL were therefore not in power when the Appellant was attacked and when
    he left Bangladesh in 2005.

31. Because the Appellant has previously been the subject of two attacks  I
    have considered paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules  which  is  set
    out below;

         The fact that a person has already been subject to  persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated.

32. I take into account that approximately fourteen years has passed  since
    the Appellant was attacked and that it was found by the FtT that he has
    not had any political involvement with the BJP since he left Bangladesh
    in 2005, and he has undertaken no political activities in the UK.

33. The background evidence contained in the CPIN of  January  2018,  which
    was not challenged by the Appellant, confirms at 2.2.10 that the number
    of people affected by political violence remains low in  proportion  to
    the size of the major parties.  In general, evidence does not  indicate
    there is a real risk of state or non state persecution or serious  harm
    for  ordinary  party  members  or  supporters.   Depending   on   their
    circumstances and profile, opposition party leaders and  activists  may
    face harassment or arbitrary arrest and detention.

34. The Appellant is not an opposition party leader or activist.

35. The main point made by the Appellant is that he is subject to an arrest
    warrant and would therefore be detained having been  arrested  on  that
    warrant, and subject to prison conditions that would breach  Article  3
    of  the  1950  Convention.   The  Appellant  must  prove  that   prison
    conditions would breach Article 3, and the standard of proof is again a
    reasonable degree of likelihood.  Article 3 prohibits torture,  inhuman
    or degrading treatment or punishment.

36. The FtT found that an arrest warrant had been issued and a copy of that
    warrant has been  provided  and  is  dated  10th  February  2009.   The
    Appellant's case is  that  the  warrant  was  issued  because  a  false
    allegation had been made against him.  Details of that allegation  have
    been provided and are contained in the Appellant's  bundle.   The  case
    against the Appellant relates to an incident said to have  occurred  on
    5th June 2008 near Sylhet town.  The Appellant  and  three  others  are
    accused of attacking people at a gathering  of  supporters  of  various
    political parties.  The accusation is made by a supporter of  the  BNP.
    At that time the BNP would have been the party in power.

37. The allegation is manifestly false because the Appellant was in the  UK
    on 5th June 2008, and had been since 2005.  It is his case that he  has
    not returned to Bangladesh since his arrival in the UK.

38. If there was no arrest warrant in force  I  would  have  no  difficulty
    whatsoever in finding that the  Appellant  has  a  reasonable  internal
    relocation option in Bangladesh, which would not be unjustly harsh.  He
    has not been active in politics since he left Bangladesh.

39. There is however an arrest warrant in force and I must consider whether
    that puts the Appellant at risk.  The  CPIN  of  January  2018  at  2.3
    states that where a person's fear is of persecution and/or serious harm
    by the state, they  will  not  be  able  to  avail  themselves  of  the
    protection of the authorities.  At 2.3.4 it is stated that  in  general
    if the threat comes from a non state actor the Bangladeshi  authorities
    are able to provide  effective  protection  but  their  willingness  to
    provide protection may depend on the profile of the person seeking  it.



40. At 2.4.1 of the CPIN it is stated that  if  the  person's  fear  is  of
    persecution or serious harm at the hands of the state, they may not  be
    able to relocate to escape  that  risk.   If  a  person's  fear  is  of
    persecution or serious harm from non state actors, such  as  supporters
    of rival political parties, middle ranking and junior  party  officials
    in most cases would not be recognised outside their home  district  and
    relocation to another area of Bangladesh is likely  to  be  reasonable,
    depending on the facts of the case and the individual circumstances and
    profile of the person.

41. The Appellant  states  that  he  has  a  fear  of  the  authorities  in
    Bangladesh, but in my view this is not well-founded notwithstanding the
    existence of an arrest warrant.   It  is  relevant  to  note  that  the
    complaint that led to the arrest warrant being issued, was  made  by  a
    BNP party member, and that party are no longer in power and in fact are
    in opposition to the authorities in Bangladesh.

42. I have to consider whether the warrant would be executed.  I take  into
    account the evidence from the lawyer in  Bangladesh  contained  in  his
    letter dated 22nd June 2017 in which he confirms that  the  warrant  of
    arrest was issued, and if the Appellant comes to Bangladesh he will  be
    arrested  on  that  warrant.   The  Appellant  must  prove  this  to  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood which is a low standard.   I  find,  to
    that standard, that there  is  a  risk  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    arrested on that warrant.  I have not been provided  with  evidence  to
    indicate otherwise.

43. The warrant indicates that the Appellant must then be placed  before  a
    magistrate who may release him on bail but is not bound to do so.

44. Again, I remind myself, that it is for the Appellant to prove  that  he
    would be at risk.  My finding is that there is no real  risk  that  the
    Appellant would in fact  be  detained  having  been  arrested  on  that
    warrant.  The complaint was not made by a supporter of the AL  who  are
    the ruling party, but by a member  of  the  opposition  party.   It  is
    obviously a false complaint, as the Appellant would have no  difficulty
    in proving that he was in the UK in June 2008.  If the case against the
    Appellant  proceeded,  he  has  access  to  legal   representation   in
    Bangladesh and he has confirmed, as has the lawyer who wrote the letter
    dated 22nd June 2017, that a warrant of arrest was issued  against  his
    family,  and  his  family  were  found  not  guilty  by  the   judicial
    magistrate.  I therefore conclude that if the Appellant was arrested on
    the warrant but  not  detained,  then  he  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution or ill-treatment.

45. I move  on  to  consider  an  alternative  scenario,  and  whether  the
    Appellant would be at risk of ill-treatment if having been arrested  on
    the warrant he was refused bail.  He would then be held  on  remand  in
    prison.   The  CIG  on  prison  conditions  in   Bangladesh   describes
    conditions as harsh and at times life threatening due to  overcrowding,
    inadequate facilities and lack of proper  sanitation.   Conditions  may
    reach the Article 3 threshold depending on the particular circumstances
    of the person concerned.

46. I do not find that I can depart from the guidance in SH Bangladesh.   I
    can depart from a country guidance decision if there are strong grounds
    to do so supported by cogent evidence.  I do not find that is the  case
    here.  SH confirms that prison conditions in Bangladesh, at  least  for
    ordinary prisoners, do not violate Article 3 of  the  1950  Convention.
    It does however confirm that the individual facts of each  case  should
    be considered.

47. Background evidence to which I was referred,  does  not  indicate  that
    prison conditions in Bangladesh now are worse than they were when  they
    were comprehensively considered by the Upper Tribunal in SH Bangladesh.
     The evidence in fact indicates that  there  has  been  an  improvement
    although conditions are still harsh.

48. I do not find that the Appellant has a profile which would mean that if
    held on remand, he would  not  be  treated  as  an  ordinary  prisoner.
    Taking the Appellant's case at its highest, he would have  a  very  low
    profile in opposition to the government, taking into account  his  lack
    of any political activity since 2005.

49. I therefore conclude that although the Appellant was attacked in  2004,
    those attacks were localised, and  the  background  evidence  indicates
    that he has a reasonable option of  internal  relocation.   My  primary
    finding is that he would not be detained having been  arrested  on  the
    warrant, but even if he was, prison conditions  in  Bangladesh  do  not
    breach Article 3, and there is a functioning judicial system  to  which
    the Appellant would have access, in the same  way  as  his  family  had
    access to representation. The allegation against the Appellant that led
    to the arrest warrant being issued, is patently false,  and  I  do  not
    find, to the lower standard of proof, that the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk of being convicted.

50. The Appellant does have a reasonable option of internal relocation, and
    my conclusion is that he would  not  be  at  risk  if  he  returned  to
    Bangladesh and exercised that option.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law
and was set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision as follows.

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Appellant has made a claim  for  international
protection.


Signed                              Date 2nd May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 2nd May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

