
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13577/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 March 2020                     |On 24 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Anderson, instructed by Justice and Rights Law
Firm Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Georgia born on 25 January 1989.  He  has
    been given permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 1 July 2014 with a visa valid  until
    16 December 2014, together with his wife, and thereafter overstayed. On
    26 May 2017 he was served with removal papers as an overstayer  and  he
    then claimed asylum on 30  May  2017.  His  claim  was  refused  on  19
    November 2018.

 3. The appellant's asylum claim was made on the basis that he feared being
    detained and tortured by the  authorities  on  return  to  Georgia.  He
    claimed to have been a member of the  United  National  Movement  (UNM)
    since 2010, working in the Ministry of Internal  Affairs.  Following  a
    change in government in 2012, when the Georgian Dream Party took  over,
    former UNM members were  persecuted.  He  continued  to  work  for  the
    Ministry of Internal Affairs between 2012 and 2014, as  a  call  centre
    operative responsible for dispatching police patrol cars to the  scenes
    of crimes and then entering the calls into a crime database. He claimed
    that in December 2013 a Senior Investigator of Serious Crime within the
    office of the Ministry of Interior (MOI), VS, asked him to  give  false
    evidence in court against his cousin LS, a high ranking member  of  the
    UNM, relating to claimed abuses of inmates in a Georgian  prison  which
    he was said to have ordered. The appellant refused. He  was  offered  a
    highly ranked position within the MOI if he agreed  to  do  it.  On  12
    February 2014 he was taken by car and was assaulted and had to  receive
    medical treatment. In April 2014 he was summoned to  the  MOI  building
    where he was made to watch footage of prison inmates  being  raped  and
    tortured. He gave VS a false promise that he would testify against  his
    cousin. He requested two to three  months  to  sort  out  his  affairs,
    including his upcoming marriage, which was agreed, and he left  Georgia
    and travelled to the UK under the pretence of going on  honeymoon.  His
    family have continued  to  receive  threats  from  VC.  His  cousin  LS
    remained on a wanted list in Georgia and fled  the  country  in  August
    2014.

 4. In the decision refusing the appellant's claim, the respondent accepted
    that the appellant had  been  employed  by  the  Georgian  Ministry  of
    Internal Affairs, as that had been accepted when he was granted a visa.
    The respondent did not accept that the appellant had been persecuted by
    the authorities in Georgia as a member of the UNM. The respondent noted
    that the appellant had given an inconsistent account  of  his  cousin's
    position within Georgia and did not accept that he had ever come to the
    adverse attention of the Georgian  authorities  or  that  he  had  been
    threatened by VC after refusing to  cooperate  with  his  demands.  The
    respondent did not accept that the appellant had a genuine,  subjective
    fear of return to Georgia and did not accept that he  was  at  risk  on
    return, or  that  his  removal  would  breach  his  human  rights.  The
    respondent considered the medical concerns of  the  appellant  and  his
    wife but concluded that neither engaged Article 3 or 8.

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was  initially
    heard on 31 January 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant,  who  did
    not believe his claim and dismissed the appeal. Judge Grant's  decision
    was found to be materially flawed  and  was  set  aside  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in its entirety. The appeal was then remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard de novo. The appeal was then heard by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro on 8 November 2019.

 6. Judge O'Garro heard from the appellant  and  his  wife.  She  also  had
    before her an expert report on the political situation in Georgia, from
    Nika Chitadze. The judge noted  that  the  appellant  had  provided  no
    evidence that his cousin LS was a member of the UNM  or  had  a  senior
    role in the government and considered that even if he was, the Georgian
    authorities would have charged him and put him  in  detention  if  they
    wanted to rather than let him move around and then leave  the  country.
    She found that, likewise, the  appellant  would  have  been  picked  up
    before he was able to leave the country if there was  any  interest  in
    him and that, in that respect, the appellant's claim was undermined  by
    the expert report. The judge accordingly rejected the appellant's claim
    in its entirety and did not accept that his family  was  receiving  any
    threats. She accorded no weight to a letter from Sociometry or  to  the
    other documentary evidence and concluded that the appellant was  of  no
    interest to the Georgian authorities and at no risk on return.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to  consider  vital  evidence  when  assessing  credibility:
    namely the evidence of the  appellant's  wife,  a  UNM  Certificate  of
    Guarantee confirming his cousin's dismissal from his employment due  to
    his political affiliation, and a UNM Certificate of Guarantee  for  the
    appellant confirming that he was a member of the UNM;  that  the  judge
    had erred by making no finding on risk on return to the  appellant  due
    to his political opinion as a member of the UNM; and that the judge had
    erred  by  speculating  as  to  the  plausibility  of  aspects  of  the
    appellant's account.

 8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on all grounds.

 9. At the hearing, both parties made submissions.

10. Mr Anderson submitted that the judge had erred by failing to  undertake
    any assessment of the evidence of the appellant's wife who had attended
    the hearing and had provided valuable  evidence  about  the  manner  of
    their departure from Georgia and the situation in which they had  found
    themselves. The judge had failed to consider the confirmation from  UNM
    that the appellant's cousin had been dismissed from the government  and
    had wrongly found at [45] that there  had  been  no  evidence  in  that
    regard. The expert Ms Chitadze had, in  her  report,  referred  to  the
    significance of that evidence, which was consistent with the  situation
    in Georgia, but that had not been considered by the  judge.  The  judge
    had also failed to consider the letter from the UNM confirming that the
    appellant was a member. Despite  the  respondent  having  accepted  the
    matter in the  refusal  decision,  it  was  unclear  from  the  judge's
    findings whether she had accepted that the appellant was  a  member  of
    the UNM. The appellant had never claimed to be a senior  active  member
    of the UNM, just that he had come to the attention of  the  authorities
    because his cousin was a senior member. The judge rejected the claim in
    its entirety at [48] and it was therefore unclear of  that  included  a
    rejection of the appellant's claim to have been a member  of  the  UNM.
    The judge had  also  erred  at  [53]  by  considering  the  documentary
    evidence after having rejected the appellant's oral evidence as lacking
    in credibility, rather than assessing all the evidence in the round.

11. Mr Anderson submitted further that the judge had  made  no  finding  on
    risk on return to  the  appellant  simply  on  the  basis  of  his  UNM
    membership, despite the expert report saying that all members  were  at
    risk, not just senior members. The judge had also erred by  speculating
    and making findings on plausibility which were in contradiction to  the
    expert report. Contrary  to  the  judge's  findings,  it  was  entirely
    plausible that the appellant had been able  to  leave  the  country  in
    spite of being of interest as a  result  of  his  cousin's  activities,
    given that he had told  the  authorities  that  he  was  going  on  his
    honeymoon and had been granted a visa on  that  basis.  There  were  no
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, which was in fact  on  all
    fours with the expert report.

12. Ms Fijiwala submitted in response that  the  judge  had  not  made  any
    material errors. The appellant's wife had simply adopted her  statement
    and had not been cross-examined. Even though the judge had not referred
    to the statement, it could not have had  any  material  impact  as  her
    evidence was just a record of what the appellant had told her.  It  was
    irrelevant that the judge had found there to  be  no  evidence  of  the
    appellant's cousin's  membership  of  the  UNM,  when  the  judge  made
    findings in the alternative on the basis that he was a UNM member.  The
    judge's findings were consistent with the expert  report.  With  regard
    the appellant's UNM membership, the judge found in any  event  that  he
    was at no risk as a low-level member. The judge was fully  entitled  to
    find that the appellant was at no risk as a low-level member and  there
    was nothing in the background material or the expert report to  support
    the appellant's claim that low-level members were at risk.  The  expert
    report only referred to  the  risks  to  senior  members.  The  judge's
    findings were not speculative but were based  on  the  evidence  before
    her.

13. Mr Anderson, in response, reiterated the  points  previously  made  and
    submitted that the judge's decision had to be set aside and the  matter
    re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion and conclusions

14. Whilst it is the case, as the grounds assert, that the  judge  did  not
    make any specific findings on the appellant's wife's  evidence  or  the
    two certificates at pages A42 and A45 of the appellant's appeal bundle,
    I do not consider it to be the case that the judge ignored  or  omitted
    consideration of that evidence or overlooked  material  evidence  which
    could have impacted upon the outcome of the appeal. There  was  nothing
    controversial in that evidence which required particular  and  specific
    consideration and it is clear that, having assessed the evidence  as  a
    whole, including those pieces of  evidence,  the  judge  made  specific
    reference only to those parts  of  the  evidence  with  which  she  had
    particular concerns or particular reason  to  explicitly  address.  The
    judge referred to the evidence of the  appellant's  wife  at  [27]  and
    confirmed that she would consider it as part of  her  decision  and  at
    [35] she confirmed that she had looked at the evidence in the round. At
    [49] the judge confirmed that she had taken into account the  documents
    relied upon by the appellant and she went on to make specific  findings
    on the document which raised specific issues, namely  the  letter  from
    Sociometry which she found to be inconsistent with the appellant's  own
    account of his level of involvement with the UNM.

15. As Ms Fijiwala submitted, the extent of  the  appellant's  wife's  oral
    evidence was to adopt her written statement and she was not  questioned
    further. The evidence within her statement was simply a confirmation of
    what the appellant had told  her  after  their  marriage  and  made  no
    reference to any direct knowledge of the problems and abuse he  claimed
    to have experienced prior to the  marriage.  Indeed,  no  details  were
    provided within the statement of what the appellant had told her  after
    their marriage, other than that  he  had  problems  with  high  ranking
    officers in the Ministry of Interior. I cannot see,  therefore,  how  a
    specific analysis of the appellant's wife's evidence could  have  taken
    the appellant's case any further: on the contrary, the absence  of  any
    knowledge on her part of any of  the  claimed  events  serves  only  to
    undermine his case. Accordingly, I do not agree with Mr  Anderson  that
    the absence of any specific findings on the appellant's wife's evidence
    is a material matter.

16. Likewise, I agree with Ms Fijiwala that the certificates do not add  to
    the appellant's case such that an absence of any  specific  refence  to
    them would amount to a material error of law. The certificate  at  page
    A42, taken at its highest, serves only to confirm  that  the  appellant
    was a member of the  UNM  at  the  time  the  letter  was  written,  in
    September 2019. It makes no reference to him being a member since  2010
    and, in any event, that was not a matter of dispute. At [43] the  judge
    recorded that the respondent accepted that the appellant was  a  member
    of the UNM and noted that he had never claimed to be a senior or active
    member. That was also her finding at  [50].  The  certificate  did  not
    suggest that the appellant was anything other than a simple  member  of
    the UNM and it therefore added nothing to the appellant's case. It  was
    Mr Anderson's submission that the certificate was of  evidential  value
    since it was unclear whether the judge accepted that the appellant  was
    a UNM member, and that her finding at [48], that she rejected his claim
    in its entirety, suggested that she did not. However, it  seems  to  me
    quite clear that the judge accepted that the appellant was a member  of
    the UNM and in the circumstances  the  certificate  took  his  case  no
    further. Accordingly, nothing material arises from the absence  of  any
    specific reference to it by the judge.

17. As for the certificate at A45, Mr Anderson submitted that  the  judge's
    finding at [45], that there was no evidence that the appellant's cousin
    was dismissed from the government, was contradicted by  that  evidence,
    and that the judge had erred by not addressing it.  However,  that  was
    not the judge's finding at [45]. The  judge's  finding  was  that  "the
    appellant has provided no evidence which I accept, that his cousin  was
    a member of UNM, was an activist in the UNM or had a senior role in the
    former Government." The indication in that finding was not  that  there
    was no evidence that his cousin held the role claimed, but  that  there
    was no acceptable evidence and, furthermore, the certificate  confirmed
    none of those matters in any event. At its highest, the certificate  is
    a confirmation from the UNM that the appellant's cousin  was  dismissed
    from the Ministry of Corrections on 27 November 2013 on  the  basis  of
    his political affiliation, which was a matter considered by  the  judge
    in the  alternative  at  [46],  where  she  found  that,  even  if  the
    appellant's cousin was a UNM member and had a senior role in the former
    Government, the fact that the Georgian authorities had not charged  him
    with a criminal offence and put him in detention  indicated  that  they
    had no intention to charge him. Accordingly, again, the absence of  any
    specific finding on the certificate was not a material matter  and  did
    not take the appellant's case any further.

18. Accordingly, I find no merit in the assertion in the grounds, and in Mr
    Anderson's submission  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  all  the
    evidence when assessing the appellant's credibility. As  I  have  said,
    there was nothing controversial in the three pieces of  evidence  which
    the grounds assert that the judge failed  to  consider  and  the  judge
    plainly had regard to the evidence as a whole, in  so  far  as  it  was
    relevant to the appellant's claim, and specifically addressed and  made
    findings on the evidence in so far as it was controversial.  The  judge
    noted inconsistencies between the account  given  in  the  letter  from
    Sociometry and the appellant's own evidence of his role with  the  UNM,
    finding that the appellant was nothing more than a simple member of the
    UNM. She did not accept his account of being pursued by the authorities
    to give evidence against his cousin because she found his account to be
    contrary to the background evidence and the expert evidence, as set out
    at [46]. Those findings were entirely open to the judge on the evidence
    before her.

19. As for the challenge in the second ground, that  the  judge  failed  to
    make findings on risk on return to the appellant as a UNM member, again
    I consider that to be contrary to the decision made. At [43] the  judge
    specifically observed that, other than claiming to be at risk from  the
    Georgian authorities because he  refused  to  make  a  false  statement
    against his cousin (a claim that she rejected, as discussed above),  he
    had provided no evidence to show that he had been targeted  because  of
    his political activities. The judge went on to  consider  the  risk  to
    ordinary UNM members and had regard to the expert report in  so  doing,
    at [44] and [47], finding that he was not at risk on  that  basis.  The
    appellant's grounds at [8] assert  that  the  judge  was  wrong  so  to
    conclude,  because  the  background  evidence  and  the  expert  report
    confirmed that any member of  the  UNM  was  at  risk  of  persecution.
    However, as Ms Fijiwala submitted, there is  nothing  in  the  evidence
    which was before the judge to indicate that ordinary members of the UNM
    were being systematically persecuted. The analysis in the expert report
    of the risk on return to the appellant,  at  page  A76  of  the  appeal
    bundle, makes no such finding, addressing risk only on the basis  of  a
    prior interest in him due to his link to his cousin, a matter  rejected
    by the judge. Accordingly, the challenge in the second  ground  has  no
    merit.

20. As for the third ground, I reject the suggestion that  the  judge  made
    her findings on the basis of speculation  as  to  plausibility.  It  is
    clear that the judge's findings were based on the evidence  before  her
    and with  full  consideration  of  the  expert  report  and  background
    evidence. Mr Anderson referred in particular to the judge's findings at
    [46] and [47], submitting that the judge was  basing  her  findings  on
    plausibility. However, I disagree. The judge's  findings  were  clearly
    based upon the evidence and the  information  provided  in  the  expert
    report and were entirely open to her.

21. Accordingly the judge, in my view, gave detailed consideration  to  all
    relevant matters and to all the evidence  in  the  round  and  provided
    clear and cogent reasons for reaching the conclusions that she did. She
    was fully entitled to make the adverse credibility  findings  that  she
    did, to reach the conclusions that she did on risk on return to Georgia
    and to dismiss the appeal on the basis that she did. She did  not  make
    any errors of law in doing so.

DECISION

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).
Signed   [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:  16 March 2020
