







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/13425/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |                   Decision and Reasons  |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On 26 June 2017                   |                   On 5 July 2017        |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                    H W G
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms O Taiwo, UK Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.  This  direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia, born on 15 January 1980.  His
      appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 22 November  2016,
      refusing his application for asylum, humanitarian protection and human
      rights under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Human Rights  Convention,  was
      dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet in a decision promulgated
      on 23 January 2017.

   3. In granting permission to appeal to the Upper tribunal on 12 May 2017,
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew was satisfied that there are arguable
      errors of law in the Judge's decision in that there were  no  reasoned
      findings as to why a low level member of the EPPF would not be at real
      risk on return to Ethiopia or as to why a person who has taken part in
      sur place activities in the UK would not be at risk on return.

   4. Ms Taiwo, who did not represent the appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, relied on the grounds of appeal.  She  submitted  that
      the Judge failed to make a clear and reasoned set of findings  on  the
      basis of the evidence before him.

   5. She referred to paragraph [22] of his decision, where the Judge stated
      that the appellant was a low level member of the EPPF from  2010.  She
      submitted that the G7-PG7 is a banned and illegal party  in  Ethiopia.
      They are labelled as terrorists by the regime. That was  confirmed  by
      'objective materials' in the appellant's bundle.

   6. The fact that he is a low level affiliate to PG7 does not prevent  the
      authorities from persecuting him. The country information  before  the
      Judge substantiated that.

   7. In reliance on the grounds she submitted that the appellant provided a
      credible account, backed  up  by  objective  evidence  which  was  not
      considered at all. Nor did the Judge explain why he did not accept his
      account. In particular the Judge did not take into account the country
      information by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch which  was
      before the Tribunal.

   8. There was furthermore an  inadequate  risk  assessment.  Even  if  the
      appellant is "incredible" the Judge failed to take into  account  that
      he would be persecuted if returned to Ethiopia, notoriously known  for
      human rights abuse.

   9. Ms Taiwo referred to the European  Parliament  Resolution  of  January
      2016 on the situation in Ethiopia. She referred to  paragraph  of  the
      resolution, in which  it  is  noted  that  the  Ethiopian  authorities
      arbitrarily arrested a number of peaceful protesters, journalists  and
      opposition party leaders in a crackdown  on  protests  in  the  Oromia
      region.

  10. She also referred to paragraph G in which it  is  contended  that  the
      government has labelled largely peaceful  protesters  as  "terrorists"
      applying the anti-terrorism proclamation  and  is  deploying  military
      forces against them.

  11. She also referred to paragraph J where it is stated that this  is  not
      the first time that Ethiopian security forces have been implicated  in
      serious human rights violations in response to peaceful protests.  The
      government is systematically  repressing  freedom  of  expression  and
      association  and  banning  individuals  from  expressing  dissent   or
      opposition.  They  are  politically   motivated   prosecutions   under
      draconian anti- terrorism laws.

  12. There is also reference at paragraph N to the leader of an  opposition
      party living in exile who was arrested  in  June  2014.  He  had  been
      condemned to death several years earlier in his absence and  has  been
      on death row since his arrest.

  13. Ms Taiwo also referred to the Human Rights Watch  report  of  2016  in
      which it is asserted that there is repression,  arbitrary  arrest  and
      detention, torture and cruel and inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
      punishment. At page 8 of  the  report,  it  is  said  with  regard  to
      "regional security arrangements," that some leading opponents  of  the
      government living in political exile in  neighbouring  countries  have
      complained that their refugee  status  has  not  been  protected  from
      harassment. In some cases various prominent  opposition  figures  have
      been arrested  and  forcibly  returned  to  Ethiopia  and  in  others,
      international campaigns or protests by human rights organisations  and
      exiled political groups have reportedly saved refugees  from  forcible
      deportation.

  14. Ms Taiwo further submitted that the Judge did  not  properly  consider
      the appellant's sur place activity, vigil  photographs,  a  series  of
      demonstrations, and has not  given  adequate  reasoning,  "except  for
      cursory touch", as to why the documentary evidence and documents  were
      not accepted.

  15. In that respect she referred to copies of four photographs produced at
      page 24 of the bundle, containing manuscript notes regarding a protest
      at Downing Street in October 2016, a protest on 30 September 2014,  an
      EPPF protest at Battersea  Park  in  September  2014  and  an  largely
      illegible vigil in June 2015.

  16. Ms Taiwo submitted that the appellant is known to be a  "cell  member"
      whose membership of the EPPF is known. He is a member of  PG7  in  the
      UK.  He will return to Ethiopia as  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  He  is
      likely to be known to the authorities.

  17. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Kandola  noted  that  permission  to
      appeal was granted in respect of his risk on return as an EPPF  member
      as well as his sur place activity.

  18. With regard to the first ground of appeal, there have been no explicit
      findings that the appellant was a low level member of the EPPF.

  19. The Judge had in fact concluded that the appellant was not a  credible
      witness [22].  In that respect, the Judge noted that the appellant had
      delayed in seeking asylum after being in the UK for three years.  That
      went to his credibility under s.8 of the 2004 Act.

  20. Mr Kandola noted that the Judge also rejected the appellant's evidence
      regarding an alleged warrant against him.  In that respect  the  Judge
      noted that the appellant had stated under cross  examination  that  he
      spoke to his uncle over the telephone a month ago. His  uncle  claimed
      that he had been arrested and detained. The Judge found that  no  good
      reason was given for that  arrest,  seeing  that  his  uncle  was  not
      involved in any political party. The appellant claimed that his  uncle
      was detained on 20 April 2016 and released on bail on 4  May  2016  on
      condition that the appellant surrendered himself to  the  authorities.
      The appellant claimed that his uncle did everything in  his  power  to
      return him to Ethiopia. As a result of  that  incident  the  appellant
      claimed asylum.

  21. However, the Judge found that there was no good reason for  his  uncle
      to have been arrested  and  detained.  Nor  was  there  any  realistic
      possibility that the authorities would have  had  reason  to  issue  a
      warrant against the appellant himself some three years later after  he
      left the country - [22].

  22. The Judge also found that his explanation for not being able to obtain
      a copy of the warrant from his uncle was unconvincing. His uncle could
      have used his mobile phone to take a picture of the warrant  and  sent
      it to the appellant if there were difficulties or risks in sending  it
      by post. [22].

  23. The Judge was not satisfied that the membership  details  relating  to
      PG7 does not relate to December 2016 rather than December 2015. On his
      own evidence he was a low level member of EPPF from  2010  and  merely
      engaged  in  collecting  money  and  issuing  leaflets  and  attending
      meetings.

  24. He submitted  that  the  Judge  did  have  regard  to  the  sur  place
      activities between September  2014  and  2016.  The  dates  have  been
      provided by the appellant himself. The Judge was  not  satisfied  that
      those activities would place him at risk on return to Ethiopia.

  25.  Mr  Kandola  submitted  that  the  adverse  credibility  points   are
      significant. They did not show that the appellant was at real risk. He
      is not identified as an EPPF member. In the  circumstances  the  Judge
      found that  the  appellant  has  no  political  profile.  His  account
      regarding his uncle had been firmly rejected.  He  will  return  as  a
      failed asylum seeker.  There was nothing to show that persons  in  his
      position, who are returned, are questioned or interrogated subject  to
      any harm.

  26. The background evidence  produced,  such  as  Human  Rights  Watch  or
      Amnesty International would most likely have picked up on any evidence
      that failed asylum seekers in the position of the appellant  would  be
      subject to a risk on return.

  27. Moreover, he has had very limited sur place activity. There is nothing
      to show that such meetings are monitored.

  28. He submitted that paragraph N of the  European  Parliament  resolution
      referred to the leader of an opposition party in exile, Mr  Tsege  who
      was noted at page 7 of the Human Rights  Watch  report,  to  be  a  UK
      citizen and Secretary General of Ginbot 7 organisation, a group banned
      for advocating armed overthrow of  the  government,  who  remained  in
      detention in Ethiopia after an unlawful deportation from Yemen. He was
      not returned from the UK.

  29. In reply, Ms Taiwo submitted that a dearth of evidence  as  to  failed
      asylum seekers did not mean that the appellant would not be  at  risk.
      It appears that he has been associated with PGN.

      Assessment

  30. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet made clear findings that the appellant
      was not a credible witness. He has set out his reasons for  coming  to
      that conclusion.  Those findings have never been  challenged.  It  was
      not asserted in the lengthy grounds of appeal that there has been  any
      error of law regarding those findings.  That is the context  in  which
      his later findings must be assessed.

  31. The Judge rejected his claim that his  uncle  had  been  arrested  and
      released on condition that the appellant  surrenders  himself  to  the
      authorities. The Judge further found  that  there  would  not  be  any
      realistic possibility that the authorities would have  had  reason  to
      issue a warrant against the appellant himself.

  32. Moreover, he noted that although the appellant claimed that his  uncle
      had received such a warrant, evidence relating to a warrant was  never
      produced albeit that his uncle could have used  his  mobile  phone  to
      take a picture of the warrant and then send it to the appellant.

  33. The Judge found on the appellant's own evidence  that  he  was  a  low
      level member of the EPPF and  that  he  had  collected  money,  issued
      leaflets and attended some meetings. The Judge was not satisfied  that
      he was a member of the PG7 in the UK since December 2015.

  34. The Judge took into account the few occasions between  September  2014
      and October 2016 where the appellant attended  various  demonstrations
      in the UK. There was however no evidence that  any  such  activity  is
      monitored. There was no evidence that any photographs  were  taken  of
      any of the demonstrators on any of those occasions. Nor was there  any
      evidence of a photographer's presence on such occasions.

  35. Nor was any background evidence  produced  -  including  from  Amnesty
      International or Human Rights Watch - that on return to  Ethiopia  the
      authorities question or interrogate failed asylum seekers.

  36. There was no evidence that there was a system  in  place  whereby  the
      Ethiopian  authorities  might  become  be  aware  of  the  appellant's
      attendance at four demonstrations between September 2014  and  October
      2016.

  37. In the circumstances, the finding by the Judge at [23]  that  his  few
      attendances at demonstrations between September 2014 and October  2016
      would not place him at risk on return to Ethiopia is sustainable.

  38. In summary, the Judge has given a careful and  detailed  decision.  He
      has clearly set out the evidence produced by  the  appellant.  He  has
      made unchallenged findings relating to  the  appellant's  credibility.
      The findings and conclusions were properly reasoned and explained.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction continued.














      Signed                             Date   4 July 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









