
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13348/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 April 2019                     |On 19 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                               MOSTAFIZUR [R]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Soloman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  in  1982.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent made on 18 October 2017 to  refuse
    his claim for asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim is that in 1999 he was elected as  president  of
    the student wing (JCD) of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP).   His
    role  involved  him  organising   meetings,   rallies,   protests   and
    demonstrations.  His problems began in late 2006 when he was  seriously
    assaulted by members of the ruling Awami League (AL).  They tried to do
    so again in early 2007 but he escaped.  Subsequently he received  phone
    threats.  He came to the UK in 2008 on a  student  visa  and  has  been
    active in BNP events  here.   This  is  known  to  the  authorities  in
    Bangladesh.

 3. The respondent did not believe his claim to have  been  assaulted,  his
    account being found to be vague and lacking  in  detail.   As  for  his
    activities in the UK, evidence submitted supported his  claim  to  have
    been involved with the BNP here but there was a lack of evidence of his
    claim to have an official role in the party.  The  respondent  accepted
    on the evidence submitted that he was a low level member of the BNP.

 4. The respondent also took against the appellant that he  did  not  claim
    asylum until 2017, six years after his leave expired.

 5. He appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 6. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 11 October 2018,  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Craft dismissed the appeal.

 7. In summary, he noted that the appellant accepted that he did  not  have
    the high profile role in the JCD in Bangladesh which he previously said
    he had when he made his claim.  His description of the attack  in  late
    2006 was implausible and unsupported by  medical  evidence.   The  fact
    that he was able to continue with  his  studies,  complete  his  exams,
    apply for a student visa and  leave  on  a  scheduled  flight  did  not
    suggest adverse interest.  Also, his  reasons  for  leaving  Bangladesh
    were contradictory, variously, to pursue his studies with the intention
    of returning or for his safety.  Further, his long  delay  in  claiming
    asylum did not assist him.  It was not believed he did not know of  the
    protection  available  to  him.    Moreover,   although   third   party
    correspondence referred to his family being targeted before  and  after
    he left there was no such evidence from his family with whom he  is  in
    regular contact.

 8. Finally, there was a lack of evidence of his sur place activities.

 9. He sought permission to appeal which was granted on 18 February 2019.

Error of Law Hearing

10. At the error of law hearing before me, Mr Solomon condensed the grounds
    into the following points.  First, the  judge  failed  to  engage  with
    material evidence in support of his  claim  to  have  been  politically
    active in Bangladesh and the UK.  Second, certain  evidence  which  was
    dealt with, was not dealt with adequately including a deposition from a
    notary dated 2018 which the judge had discounted because of a  lack  of
    information as to how it was obtained.  Such did not  necessarily  mean
    that  the  contents  could  not  be  relied  on.   The  reasoning   was
    insufficient.  There was other evidence confirming  his  attendance  at
    demonstrations and other political events and other important documents
    including from supporting witnesses which had not been considered.

11. Ms Willocks-Briscoe's response was that it had been conceded before the
    judge that the appellant had been involved with the BNP  in  Bangladesh
    but not at a high  level.   The  judge  gave  careful  thought  to  the
    evidence and had engaged with  it  holistically.   He  was  not  to  be
    expected to have to comment on every item.  All in  all,  his  findings
    and conclusion were adequately reasoned.

Consideration

12. The judge stated  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was  central  to
    determining the appeal.  He then went on to note  at  some  length  the
    Home Office CPIN: Bangladesh: Opposition  to  the  Government  (January
    2018) which includes  a  comment  that  opposition  party  leaders  and
    activists may face harassment or arbitrary arrest  and  detention.   He
    then went on to give his reasons for finding that although he  had  low
    level involvement for the BNP in Bangladesh he  did  not  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities there.

13. It is clear that the judge gave careful thought to his analysis  and  a
    number of his reasons for finding against the  appellant's  credibility
    were open to  him  on  the  evidence  and  have  not  been  challenged.
    However, I consider that the analysis  does  show  sufficient  material
    errors such as to make his decision unsafe.

14. First, while a judge cannot be expected to comment on  every  item  put
    before him I agree with Mr Solomon that the judge failed to engage with
    material evidence.  At [16] he criticised the appellant for  not  being
    able to particularise except in very general terms  his  roles  in  the
    student wing of the BNP in Bangladesh.   Yet  he  noted  that  in  oral
    evidence the appellant referred to the organisation of  demonstrations,
    protest meetings and leafleting.  He gave further details at interview.
     The judge has not adequately explained why, the  facets  of  the  role
    having been set out, he considered the evidence was unparticularised.

15. It is clear that the judge placed considerable adverse weight  on  what
    he considered to be unparticularised evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
    activities not only on the basis of his own evidence but also  on  that
    of the witnesses Mr Uddin and Mr Ahamed, who at the  hearing  spoke  to
    his activities in the  UK  from  2012.   Again,  the  judge  (at  [52])
    described that evidence as "non particularised."  Yet at [26] and  [27]
    detail was given by them as to the appellant's position and  activities
    in the UK including that he is an Assistant General  Secretary  of  the
    youth wing of the BNP.  I consider that  the  judge,  in  reaching  his
    conclusion (at  [52])  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claim to have been involved in  political  activities  here
    since his arrival, failed to give adequate reasons for disbelieving the
    evidence of these two witnesses.  A consequence is that he  has  failed
    to consider whether his claimed sur place activities could put  him  at
    risk on return.

16. Further he failed to have regard to letters in the  appellant's  bundle
    bearing to be from Mirza Abbas, member of the  BNP  Standing  Committee
    and ex minister; the Bangladesh JCD; the Head Office of  the  BNP  and,
    (in the Respondent's  bundle),  from  the  President  and  the  General
    Secretary of the UK BNP which support the appellant's claims as to  his
    political career and fear of persecution.

17. A further difficulty is the judge's  consideration  of  the  deposition
    indicating the filing of a case against him made in  2018.   The  judge
    dealt  with  this  at  [49].   He  found  unsatisfactory  the  lack  of
    information from the appellant as to how and when his father had  found
    out about the  charge  made  against  him.   Also,  who  delivered  the
    document to the appellant and apparently arranged for  its  attestation
    and translation.  The judge noted that the appellant claimed to  be  in
    daily contact by phone with his parents.  The  judge  concluded:  "When
    looked at, with all the other evidence to the Tribunal, in  the  round,
    and taking into account the Tribunal's findings as to  the  appellant's
    overall credibility, the Tribunal can  attach  little  weight  to  this
    document ..."

18. I find two difficulties with this analysis.  First,  his  dismissal  of
    the reliability of the document because of inadequate explanation as to
    how it was got by the appellant is  not  sufficient.   He  should  have
    examined the contents.  Second, while  he  stated  he  looked  at  that
    document "in the round" his going on immediately to state that  "taking
    into  account  the  ...  findings  as  to   the   appellant's   overall
    credibility" he can give it little weight, suggests he has fallen  into
    the trap identified by the Court of Appeal in Ex Parte Virjon B  [2002]
    EWHC 1469, a case in which  the  Adjudicator  had  assessed  a  medical
    report on the basis of his credibility findings  rather  than  reaching
    his findings on the basis of all the  evidence  including  the  medical
    report.

19. Bearing in mind the need for anxious scrutiny, as indicated, I consider
    that these errors taint the decision  such  that  his  findings  cannot
    stand and the case must be reheard.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal shows material  error  of  law.
    It is set aside.  The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate
    under section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2 to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing on all issues.  No findings stand.  The member(s) of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to consider the  case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Craft.

    No anonymity order made.


Signed                                             Date 18 June 2019

