
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13327/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2018                             |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, BR, was born in 1997 and is a  male  citizen
    of Iraq.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  O'Neill)
    against a decision of the Secretary of State refusing him international
    protection.  The First-tier Tribunal in a  decision  promulgated  on  4
    April 2018, dismissed the asylum  appeal  but  allowed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection and Article 3 ECHR grounds.  The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge comprehensively rejected the appellant's claim that there was
    a feud between the appellant's family and another family in  Iraq  such
    that the appellant has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  of  ill-
    treatment on return to that  country.   Indeed,  at  [30]  et  seq  she
    rejected the entire credibility of  the  appellant's  account  of  past
    events.  However, following the country guidance decision in AA  (Iraq)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944) she found that the appellant could not  return  to
    his home area of Kirkuk and  as  an  individual  of  Kurdish  ethnicity
    without a CSID or other identity documents would be at risk  on  return
    to Baghdad, the city to which it is proposed to return  the  appellant.
    The grounds of appeal complain that the judge should have departed from
    the country guidance of AA in the light of evidence adduced before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for  the  Secretary
    of State, accepted that, for the reasons given in the appellant's  Rule
    24 statement, Judge O'Neill did not err in law such that  her  decision
    falls to be set aside.  He accepted that the judge  had  given  reasons
    for relying upon the country guidance which, until  it  is  superseded,
    continues to be valid.  I agree that it was open to the judge  for  the
    reasons which she has given, to rely upon  the  country  guidance.  The
    evidence before her which had been adduced by the  Secretary  of  State
    did not compel her  to  depart  from  the  country  guidance.   In  the
    circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is dismissed.

 5. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

