


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/13268/2016
     PA/13128/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 17 November 2017                         |On : 21 November 2017        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                                     VO
                                     GO
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants appeal, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the respondent's decision  to
refuse their protection and human rights claim. Although separate  decisions
were given in the  appellants'  appeals  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
grounds seeking permission were the same for both appellants and  the  grant
of permission was made in one decision and accordingly I have not  seen  the
need to issue two separate decisions.

The appellants are citizens of Nigeria and are sister and brother,  born  on
14 January 2000 and 5 June 1997 respectively. They arrived together  in  the
UK on 3 April 2013 with visas  as  unaccompanied  children  to  visit  their
sponsor, their grandfather, valid until 18 July  2013.  On  23  August  2013
they claimed asylum. Their claims were refused, the first appellant's  on  7
October 2016 and the second appellant's on 16 November 2016.  They  appealed
those decisions and their appeals were heard in the First-tier  Tribunal  on
29 March 2017 and were dismissed in decisions promulgated on 10 April  2017.


The Appellants' Case

The  appellants'  claim  is  based  upon  the  circumstances  of  the  first
appellant who states that she fears being subjected to  female  circumcision
if returned to Nigeria. It is claimed  that  on  New  Year's  Day  2013  she
overheard her parents and extended family members saying that she  would  be
circumcised when she turned 14 years of age as it was family  tradition  and
tradition in their tribe, the Isoko tribe. She told  her  parents  that  she
did not want to be circumcised but was told that it would  be  done  whether
or not she agreed. Her parents dropped her and her brother  to  the  airport
to come to the UK to visit their grandfather. He had applied for a visa  for
them but had subsequently passed away  in  October  or  November  2012.  The
second appellant claimed that in December 2013, when  they  contacted  their
parents, they told him and his sister that they had  to  return  to  Nigeria
for the circumcision.

It was noted, in refusing the  first  appellant's  claim,  that  when  asked
about her fear of returning to Nigeria she  initially  stated  that  it  was
boring there and there was no light and that sometimes  the  water  stopped,
and when asked if there were other reasons said no. It was only  when  asked
a third time that she mentioned fearing  being  subjected  to  circumcision.
The respondent noted further that, whilst the  appellants'  claim  was  that
they had had no contact with their parents since December 2013, Home  Office
records and information requested from the British Embassy in  Lagos  showed
that their mother had been issued with a visit visa for the UK in  2005  and
that she had not returned to Nigeria since leaving the country. The  records
therefore  contradicted  the  appellants'  account  of  their  mother  being
present during the conversation regarding circumcision and  of  having  last
seen their mother when she dropped them off at the airport and thus  damaged
their  credibility.  The  respondent  considered,  furthermore,   that   the
appellants' account of their parents intending to get  the  first  appellant
circumcised by force, and being aware  of  how  she  felt  about  that,  was
inconsistent with their claim that  their  parents  allowed  them  to  leave
Nigeria. Accordingly the respondent  did  not  accept  the  account  of  the
appellants' fear of return to Nigeria and did not accept that they  were  at
risk on return. It was considered in any event that there was a  sufficiency
of protection and internal flight alternative available to  the  appellants.
The respondent did not accept that  the  appellants'  removal  would  breach
their human rights.

The appellants' appeals against the respondent's  decisions  were  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan. The judge issued separate decisions  for
each appellant given their different ages, as  the  first  appellant  was  a
minor. The appellants did not appear before the judge but were  represented.
Their representative advised the judge that the appellants were hesitant  to
attend in the absence of a witness statement and that no witness  statements
had been prepared. The respondent produced  additional  evidence  which  had
been  served  on  the  appellants'  representative  that  morning  and   the
appellants' representative stated that he  had  not  seen  the  respondent's
appeal bundles.


The appellants' representative renewed  an  adjournment  request  previously
made in writing and refused, to instruct an expert to prepare  a  report  in
relation to FGM in Nigeria  and  to  enable  the  respondent  to  serve  the
required  bundles   on   the   appellants'   solicitors.   The   appellants'
representative also advised the judge that there were no witness  statements
from the appellants because they were hesitant to  make  statements  without
having an expert report to back them up. The judge refused  the  adjournment
request and put the  case  back  until  later  in  the  day  to  enable  the
appellants to attend but they did not attend. She  then  proceeded  to  hear
submissions from both legal representatives.


The judge did not accept the appellants' claim. She was satisfied, from  the
evidence produced by the respondent that the appellants' mother was  not  in
Nigeria in January 2013 when the conversation about female circumcision  was
said to have taken place. She was not satisfied  that  the  appellants  were
from a community or place where there was a prevalence of FGM  or  that  the
first appellant was at an age when FGM was most commonly practised. She  did
not accept that the appellant was threatened with FGM at the age of  14  and
was not satisfied that she would be at risk of FGM at the current  time.  In
any event she considered that the appellants could relocate to another  part
of Nigeria. The judge considered  that  the  appellants  had  established  a
family life in the UK with the uncle with whom they resided  and  with  each
other, and that both appellants had established a private life  in  the  UK,
but she concluded that any interference would  be  proportionate  and  would
not breach Article 8 of the ECHR. She accordingly dismissed the  appeals  on
all grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge Sullivan's decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on the basis of her refusal to adjourn  the  hearing  despite
the fact that new  material  had  been  served  on  the  appellants  by  the
respondent upon which their  solicitors  had  had  no  opportunity  to  take
instructions and  which  formed  a  central  part  in  the  judge's  adverse
findings. It was asserted that this gave rise to procedural unfairness.


Permission to appeal was initially refused in the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
was subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal on 18 September 2017.

Appeal hearing

The appellants did  not  appear  at  the  hearing  before  me.  Their  legal
representatives had advised the Tribunal,  in  a  letter  dated  13  October
2017, that they had withdrawn their instructions and that they therefore  no
longer acted  for  them.  There  was  no  explanation  for  the  appellants'
absence. I was satisfied that the appellants were aware of  the  hearing  as
the notice of hearing had been served upon them at  their  home  address  as
well as on their legal representatives. I therefore saw  no  reason  not  to
proceed with the appeals. Mr Melvin made  brief  submissions,  relying  upon
the respondent's rule 24 response.


Consideration and findings.

It is plainly the case that Judge Sullivan gave  detailed  consideration  to
the adjournment request made on behalf of the appellants and  addressed  the
matter at length in her decision at [18]  to  [33].  She  referred  to,  and
plainly had full regard to, the approach in Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)
[2014] UKUT 00418. The judge  plainly  gave  careful  consideration  to  the
question of procedural unfairness, having  particular  regard  to  the  fact
that one of the appellants was a child. The judge noted that the  appellants
had been in possession of all the key  documents  for  some  time  and  were
therefore fully aware of the respondent's case against them. She noted  that
the appellants had had a responsible adult, their uncle, to guide  them  and
they had also had the benefit of legal representation. The judge  considered
that the appellants had had plenty of opportunity to instruct an expert  and
to prepare witness statements and she was  satisfied,  in  any  event,  that
there was adequate background information relevant  to  their  case  without
the need for expert evidence. For all of those reasons it seems to  me  that
the judge was fully entitled to conclude  that  no  proper  explanation  had
been given for the appellants' failure to attend the hearing and  no  proper
reason had been given as to why the appeals  should  not  proceed  in  their
absence.

I have given careful consideration to the additional materials  produced  by
the respondent at the hearing, and have  myself  assessed  the  question  of
procedural  unfairness  in  light  of  those  materials.  Aside   from   the
respondent's country information report  for  Nigeria  for  August  2016,  a
document in the public domain that  evidence  consists  of  the  application
details for RO, the appellants' mother, and the CID case notes  relating  to
RO. Those documents show that Ms O was issued with a visit visa for  the  UK
in  May  2005  following  an  interview  in  March  2005,  that   she   made
applications in the UK in 2010 for a certificate of  approval  for  marriage
and for an EEA residence card, that she made a human rights claim in the  UK
in June 2012 which was refused, that she was served with removal  papers  in
June 2012, that she made a points based application in  September  2013  and
that she subsequently failed to report and was listed as an  absconder  from
January 2014.


It is asserted in the grounds that it was unfair  of  the  judge  to  accord
weight to those documents, which formed the  central  part  of  her  adverse
findings  in  the  appellants'  claim,  when  the  appellants  had  had   no
opportunity to see the  documents  and  give  their  instructions  to  their
solicitors. However, as Mr Melvin submitted,  the  appellants  were  already
fully aware of the respondent's case that their mother was  in  the  UK,  as
that was set out in the refusal reasons served on them several months  prior
to the appeal hearing and referred to in their grounds of appeal before  the
First-tier Tribunal. Furthermore, as  Judge  Sullivan  said  at  [49],  when
addressing the respondent's evidence, the matter of Ms Okoro's presence  and
applications made  in  the  UK  was  put  to  the  first  appellant  in  her
interview, at [156] to [169], and she had therefore  had  ample  opportunity
to address the matter. Accordingly the new material produced at the  hearing
added nothing material to what was already known by the  appellants  and  it
was certainly not a matter of new issues being raised  at  the  hearing,  as
the grounds suggest.


For all of these reasons it is undoubtedly the case that Judge Sullivan  had
regard to all relevant matters in considering the  adjournment  request  and
approached the relevant issues appropriately and fairly. I  am  entirely  in
agreement with the respondent's view expressed in the rule 24 response  that
it is inconceivable that the judge should be charged with  procedural  error
in such circumstances. The judge was entirely entitled to make  the  adverse
credibility findings that she did about the appellants'  claim  in  relation
to FGM and in any event provided full and proper  reasons,  based  upon  the
background evidence before her, as to why they  would  not  be  at  risk  in
Nigeria on that basis. The conclusions  that  she  reached  were  fully  and
properly open to her on the evidence.

For all of these reasons I find no error of  law  in  the  judge's  decision
requiring it to be set aside. I uphold the judge's decision.

DECISION

The appellants'  appeals  are  accordingly  dismissed.  The  making  of  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a  point  of
law requiring the decision to be set aside.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
appellants' appeals therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  maintain  that
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.



Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 20
November 2017
