
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/13081/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18th April 2018                        | On 1st May 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   Mr E.R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr N. Vaughan, Solicitor


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge R.L. Walker) allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr
    E.R. against the Secretary of State's refusal to grant  his  protection
    claim on account of his conversion from Islam to Christianity.

 2. For the sake of clarity throughout this decision I shall refer  to  the
    Secretary of  State  as  "the  Respondent"  and  to  Mr  E.R.  as  "the
    Appellant" reflecting their respective positions before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellant entered the UK on 7th July  2014,  having  left  Iran  by
    lorry on 28th June 2014.  He  had  travelled  through  various  unknown
    countries and was encountered by Essex Police on his arrival in the UK.
     He claimed asylum the same day (the first claim).

 4. The basis of the first claim to asylum was that he could not return  to
    Iran because, he said, he had been accused  there  of  spying  for  the
    Israeli government.  Suffice to say for the purposes of this  decision,
    the Respondent disbelieved his claim as wholly incredible  and  refused
    it.  He appealed the decision refusing his first claim to the  FtT  and
    his appeal came before that Tribunal on 22nd January  2015.   The  FtT
    Judge, having heard from the Appellant and considered the evidence  put
    before her, made findings comprehensively disbelieving the  Appellant's
    account.  She said at [20] of her decision  "I  completely  reject  his
    claim as lacking all credibility."

 5. By 13th April 2015 the Appellant was appeals rights exhausted.  On 13th
    June 2016, the Appellant lodged further submissions  claiming  that  he
    had converted  to  Christianity  (the  second  claim).   Those  further
    submissions included a witness statement from the Appellant dated  12th
    April 2016 in which he said that started attending church in the autumn
    of 2014 and had been baptised on 6th December 2015  at  St  Augustine's
    Church in Halifax.  He also maintained in that witness  statement  that
    the account given by him in his original asylum application  (i.e.  the
    first claim) was true and correct.

 6. The Respondent interviewed  the  Appellant  about  his  claim  to  have
    converted to Christianity, considered it and refused it by  a  decision
    set out in her refusal letter  of  15th  November  2016.   The  refusal
    letter set out that the responses given by the Appellant  in  interview
    were vague, generalised and  did  not  give  the  impression  that  the
    conversion  was  genuine.   The  timing  of  the  conversion  and   the
    Appellant's failure to mention his burgeoning interest in  Christianity
    during the hearing of  the  first  claim  led  the  Respondent  to  the
    conclusion that the second claim was an opportunistic  one.   Thus  the
    Appellant's credibility was in issue.

 7. The Appellant appealed the refusal and the appeal came before the First-
    tier Tribunal on 15th December 2017.  The FtT allowed the appeal and it
    is this decision which forms the basis of the instant appeal before me.



Onward Appeal

 8. The Respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal.   The  grounds  seeking
    permission are lengthy but they are succinctly summarised in the  grant
    of permission and I can do no better than set out  the  relevant  parts
    here below:

         "The grounds assert that the Judge erred in  the  following  ways.
         The Judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for  accepting  that
         the Appellant was a  genuine  Christian  convert  in  the  face  of
         matters adverse to his credibility  and/or  had  been  perverse  in
         accepting the same.  The Judge also misapplied  the  law  regarding
         previous decisions on appeal and how to treat  claimed  conversions
         happening after previous asylum refusals.

         The Judge identified a series  of  matters  which  undermined  the
         Appellant's credibility, but accepted  the  alleged  conversion  to
         Christianity apparently  on  the  strength  of  evidence  from  his
         pastor.  However, the Judge does not appear to  have  engaged  with
         how evidence should be treated in the  instant  case  which  should
         have been placed before a pervious tribunal, or  clearly  explained
         why the evidence of the Appellant's pastor (and in  particular  the
         pastor's opinion on the sincerity of  the  Appellant's  conversion)
         sufficiently  allayed  the  Judge's  concerns  otherwise  with  the
         Appellant's credibility.

         It is arguable in the circumstances that the Judge made a material
         error in law.  Permission is granted on all grounds pleaded."

 9. Mr Vaughan on behalf  of  the  Appellant  served  a  Rule  24  response
    defending the decision.

10. Thus the matter comes before me to decide if the decision  of  the  FtT
    contains such error of law that it requires to be set aside and remade.



Error of Law Hearing

11. Mrs Pettersen, for the Respondent, referred  to  and  relied  upon  the
    grounds seeking permission.  She emphasised by reference to [26.2] that
    the FtTJ had failed to follow his own self-direction.  At [26.2],  when
    discussing the first claim made by the Appellant, the  judge  said  the
    following:

         "This earlier decision is relevant in so  far  as  the  Appellant's
         previous claim was found to be totally incredible.  This must  mean
         that  his  current  claim  needs  to  be  considered  with  anxious
         scrutiny."

12. She then referred to [26.3] with particular emphasis on the  final  two
    sentences, where the judge said:

         "What I also consider to be relevant is that the Appellant's  claim
         now is that he had started attending Church in the autumn  of  2014
         and soon started attending regularly.   This  must  have  coincided
         with the run up  to  his  appeal  hearing  on  22nd  January  2015.
         Despite this, there is no mention at all of this regular attendance
         of Church.  I accept that the Appellant had not  been  baptised  at
         this stage and he may well have not made the  decision  to  convert
         but this would have been very important evidence that  should  have
         been disclosed.  The Appellant was legally represented at the  time
         and no proper explanation has been given as to  why  this  evidence
         was not disclosed."

13. Mrs Pettersen emphasised that, having set out this  key  issue  in  the
    last two sentences of [26.3], nowhere has the judge gone on  to  assess
    that evidence and make a proper finding on  whether  this  affects  the
    Appellant's credibility concerning the second claim.  This was an issue
    at the heart of the matter.

14. Therefore, she continued, instead of doing what he was  tasked  to  do,
    the FtTJ simply sidestepped the issue, saying at [26.6]:

         "Whilst I do have  some  concerns  about  the  Appellant's  general
         credibility. (sic) I nevertheless accept what  has  been  said  by
         Reverent (sic) Hellewell.  I therefore find that the Appellant  has
         proven,  to  the  relevant  standard,  that  he  is   a   Christian
         convert...."

15. This, Mrs Pettersen said, showed that the judge had taken  an  improper
    approach to the evidence.  He had failed to provide rational reasons in
    respect of what were  the  material  matters  in  dispute  between  the
    parties.  Whilst it was accepted that the judge was  entitled  to  find
    the supportive evidence of Reverend Hellewell to be credible, that  did
    not entitle the judge to treat that evidence as  determinative  of  the
    Appellant's credibility.  The judge had appeared to delegate  the  task
    of determining credibility  to  the  Reverend  Hellewell,  rather  than
    making his own findings. In other words he had sidestepped  the  issues
    before him.  This had led to an irrational decision, which  meant  that
    it was unsustainable.  She asked that the decision  be  set  aside  and
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

16. Mr Vaughan defended the decision.  He referred to the Rule 24  response
    and said as a general proposition that the decision of the FtTJ is both
    intelligible and adequate.  He referred to [25] where the judge said he
    had considered the totality of the evidence before him, and further had
    self-directed that the Devaseelan principles apply [26].

17. He said the judge took into  account  not  only  the  evidence  of  the
    Reverend Hellewell but also that of the supporting church  members  and
    on that evidence came to a conclusion that the  Appellant's  conversion
    was genuine.

18. He said that the Appellant did not bring the matter of  his  conversion
    to the attention of the Tribunal at the first claim hearing, because at
    that time he had "not converted".  The first claim hearing had been  in
    January 2015 and he was not baptised until December 2015.   Mr  Vaughan
    submitted therefore there was no need for the Appellant to mention  it.
    The decision was adequately reasoned and should stand.


Consideration

19. It is only if I am satisfied that there has been a  material  error  of
    law in a decision, that I am entitled to set aside  that  decision.   I
    also remind myself that reasons need only be adequate for  them  to  be
    sustainable, and further that this Tribunal will not lightly  interfere
    with the findings of a Tribunal properly directed.

20. However I find I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  FtTJ  is  not
    sustainable and I now give my reasons for this finding.

21. As the grounds seeking permission state, the critical issue at hand  in
    this  appeal  revolved  around  the  credibility  of  the   Appellant's
    conversion to Christianity and the timing of that conversion.   To  put
    it simply, the FtTJ was tasked with deciding the  question  of  whether
    the conversion was a genuine one or an opportunistic  one.  Credibility
    lies at the heart of this appeal.

22. I find it was  incumbent  upon  the  FtTJ,  being  presented  with  the
    circumstances relating to this appeal, to resolve the material point of
    the  Appellant's  failure  to  mention  his  significant  interest   in
    Christianity at the first claim hearing.  The judge himself referred to
    this as being important evidence which should have been  disclosed  and
    then fails to make a finding on whether it detracts  from  the  overall
    credibility of the claim before him. I  reject  Mr  Vaughan's  argument
    that the Appellant did not bring the matter of his  conversion  to  the
    attention of the Tribunal on the first occasion because he had  not  at
    that time converted and that the information was therefore not relevant
    to the proceedings.  It is a matter which requires an answer.

23. Furthermore the Respondent set out in her reasons  for  refusal  letter
    that one of the reasons why she  doubted  the  Appellant's  credibility
    revolved around his failure to mention his burgeoning  Christianity  at
    the appeal hearing  dealing  with  the  first  claim.   I  find  it  is
    incorrect of Mr Vaughan to say that the fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    "not converted" made his lack of disclosure irrelevant.  The issue  was
    raised by the Respondent and was a matter which went to  the  heart  of
    the  Appellant's  credibility.   This  was  something  which  only  the
    Appellant could answer.

24. I find therefore that Mrs Pettersen's  submission  that  the  FtTJ  was
    deficient in dealing with this aspect of the claim is made out.  Indeed
    reading the decision it is hard to see what the  FtTJ  is  saying.   He
    sets out what is the issue at [26.3] and confirms  that  this  is  very
    important evidence which should have been disclosed.  He then makes  no
    finding on whether or not that affects the Appellant's credibility.

25. Instead, he simply goes on to set out the Appellant's evidence which is
    that he is regularly attending church.   He then refers to the evidence
    of Reverend Hellewell and the church members supporting him.

26. After setting out the evidence referred to above, judge says "Whilst  I
    do have some concerns about the Appellant's general credibility.  (sic)
    I nevertheless accept what has been said by Reverent (sic)  Hellewell."
    Nowhere do I see that the judge has  set  out  what  his  concerns  are
    regarding the Appellant's credibility. In not so doing, it is  hard  to
    see whether the judge has exercised the appropriate  caution  necessary
    in cases of this kind and upon what  basis  the  judge  has  reached  a
    conclusion that the evidence of Reverend Hellewell should be treated as
    determinative.  These errors are material errors.

27. I find therefore that the decision cannot stand.  I set it aside in its
    entirety.  The decision will need to be remade at a fresh hearing.

28. The decision  should  be  remitted  to  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Because the fact finding is deficient, I am of the view that
    it cannot be said that the parties have had a  fair  hearing.   In  the
    interests of justice therefore I find that this is a matter which needs
    to  be  reheard  afresh  and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is   the
    appropriate Tribunal for that hearing.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  29th  December  2017
is set aside for material error.  The matter is remitted  to  that  Tribunal
for a de novo hearing, before a judge other than Judge R.L. Walker.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     26 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
