

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: PA 13865-17

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On    02 October 2018                         |On 09 October 2018           |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                    [U P]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Charlotte Bayati  (counsel instructed by Birnberg
Pierce & Partners)
For the respondent: Mrs A Fijiwala

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Stella Rozanski), sitting at Taylor House on  14  June,
    to  an asylum and human rights appeal by a Tamil citizen of Sri  Lanka,
    born 1983. An issue was raised by the presenting officer's note  as  to
    whether the appeal had been limited to article 3 grounds; but the judge
    clearly took the view that she had an asylum  appeal  before  her,  and
    dealt with it on that basis too.

 2. This was a second asylum appeal: the appellant had arrived and made his
    original claim in 2010, and his appeal  against  refusal  of  that  was
    finally dismissed in 2011. He did nothing to regularize  his  situation
    (nor the Home Office anything to remove him) till 2016, when he applied
    for an EEA  residence  card,  which  was  refused  that  July.  Further
    submissions on asylum followed in March 2017, refused on 4 December.


 3. The judge allowed the appellant's article 3 and 8 human rights  appeal,
    on the basis that returning him to Sri Lanka would  present  a  suicide
    risk which would not be prevented by proper care  there.  There  is  no
    cross-appeal against that conclusion. In dealing  with  the  article  3
    appeal, she considered the report  of  a  consultant  psychiatrist,  Dr
    Saleh Dhumad, and 'several addenda'. At 43 she preferred his assessment
    of the appellant's suicide risk as being more likely correct than  that
    of another consultant psychiatrist who had recently seen him.

 4. The relevance of that to the asylum appeal is set out in ground  2:  it
    is suggested that the judge went on to find at 56 that "the Appellant's
    claims to be politically active were 'completely inconsistent' with the
    medical evidence". As Mrs Fijiwala pointed out, this was not  what  the
    judge had said: her full finding on this point was this:

       The reports that the appellant has regularly engaged in  sufficiently
       high level of political activism so as to have come to the  attention
       of the Sri Lankan authorities is  completely  inconsistent  with  the
       extensive NHS medical evidence about the  appellant's  mental  health
       and activities. This indicates that since the latter part of 2011 the
       appellant has been consistently psychotic with paranoid delusions, is
       anxious, spends most of his time in his room, is afraid  to  go  out,
       fears being attacked, appears to have a low IQ and has  a  very  poor
       level of functioning.

 5. The appellant's supporting evidence had him as  "a  committed  activist
    working with TGTE 'Transitional Government of  Tamil  Eelam'  for  four
    years, distributing leaflets and other material, attending meetings and
    demonstrations  and  helping  with  logistical  support".  Dr  Dhumad's
    addendum of 1 June, in a bundle filed the day before the hearing (as to
    which the judge had complaints to which I shall come later), said  this
    at 5.4 - 5.5:

       [The appellant] told me that he takes part in Tamils diaspora  events
       and he attends Hindu temples accompanied whenever he feels able to do
       so ... he is angry with the Sri Lankan government  and  he  wants  to
       help the people in Sri Lanka and ... to make the world aware of  what
       is happening there and he wants the Tamil people to get freedom. This
       behaviour seems completely in line with  a  trauma  survivor.  Having
       witnessed and suffered serious trauma, it seems very plausible to  me
       that he wanted to fight to prevent such  trauma  happening  to  other
       people.

 6. The reason why the appellant claimed to have come to the notice of  the
    Sri Lankan authorities as a result of these activities was that he said
    his father had been detained by police there on 12 - 14  November  2016
    (not December, as Mrs Bayati pointed out the judge had said at 55):  he
    was said to have been released as a result of representations made by a
    lawyer. His wife had also been detained from 29 - 30 November 2017,  as
    well  as  in  2010:  in  both  cases   she   was   released   following
    representations by a former MP. The judge's treatment of  the  evidence
    about this forms the subject of ground 1.

 7. The relevant risk category is set out in the judicial head-note  to  GJ
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  319  (IAC)  as
    follows:

       (7)     The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution
           or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention  or
           otherwise, are:

             (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

 8. The judge set out the entire head-note at 24, and her  reference  to  a
    "sufficiently high level of political activism" was clearly intended to
    relate to the 'significant role' required  for  risk  category  (a)  to
    apply. On the basis of  the  appellant's  claimed  activities  in  this
    country, she was clearly entitled to take the view that  his  r�le  had
    not been significant in this way, even without taking account  of  what
    Dr Dhumad had said in his addendum. As she said at 57 - 58

       The appellant has provided no credible evidence that he has played  a
       significant [my emphasis] political role in the UK  or  that  he  has
       otherwise gained a high profile here.  GJ   indicates  that  the  Sri
       Lankan authorities carry out sophisticated surveillance of  diasporic
       activity so that mere attendance  at  demonstrations  does  not  make
       individuals of adverse  interest  to  them  ...  to  the  extent  the
       appellant is sometimes well enough to participate in protest or other
       political activity, the Sri Lankan authorities would be aware that he
       does so only occasionally and at a low level.

 9. That disposes of ground 2; but ground  1  is  still  relevant:  if  the
    appellant's family members had in fact come under suspicion as a result
    of his activities here, then that  might  still  be   relevant  to  the
    question of whether he himself would be at real  risk  on  return.  The
    judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  about  that,  and  the
    complaints made about them in the grounds, now follow.

10. These are the judge's key points on credibility:

       55. The claims [about the detention of  the  appellant's  father  and
       wife] were not put forward in the appellant's further submissions  in
       March 2017 and instead have been advanced at a very late stage in the
       appeal process. No explanation has been volunteered as  to  why  this
       should be the case.

       56: see 4.

       57 - 58: see 8.

       59. No reason has been provided for why their [the appellant's father
       and  wife's]  statements  and  the  corroborating  evidence  from  an
       attorney and an ex-government minister should not have been  produced
       until the eve of the appeal hearing in June 2018.

       60.  (1)  ...  the  nature  of   [the   lawyer   and   former   MP's[
       representations has not been stated,  and  no  copy  of  the  claimed
       representations has been provided.

       60. (2) I also consider it inconsistent that the  full  name  of  the
       attorney does not appear on his bar membership card.

       61. The British High Commission in Colombo conducts checks to  verify
       documents ... from January 2014  to  July  2015  "The  vast  majority
       (86.7%) of letters provided  by  Sri  Lankan  attorneys  that  [were]
       verified [were not  credible.  The  High  Commission  considers  that
       caution about accepting the  insertions  of  letters  of  Sri  Lankan
       attorneys is particularly indicated where  there  are  no  supporting
       documents to verify"

       62. ... the letters from Sri Lanka provided  by  the  appellant  were
       produced too late for the  respondent  to  conduct  any  verification
       checks and ... it is not claimed that  there  are  any  extant  court
       proceedings of an arrest warrant for the appellant. Thus there are no
       documents to verify. In all of these circumstances, I find  that  the
       appellant has failed to establish that the supporting documents  from
       Sri Lanka are reliable.

11. I will deal with the challenges to them  one  by  one,  without  losing
    sight of the principle that what needs to be considered is  the  effect
    of whatever I find is made out on the judge's credibility findings as a
    whole. My views on the points made at paragraph 6 of the grounds are as
    follows:

    i. I agree there is not much in the judge's point at 60 (1) on the lack
       of any information about the nature of the  representations  made  by
       the lawyer and the former MP. Both might simply be  assumed  to  have
       been using whatever influence they possessed to secure the release of
       a client or former constituent; the wife's 2010 detention was said to
       have  been  only  for  questioning  about  the   appellant's   former
       involvement with the Tamil Tigers and his escape from then. While her
       2017 detention is said to have been for failure to  give  information
       about the appellant's activities here "which is an offence under  the
       Prevention of Terrorism Act", the letter  leaves  it  very  far  from
       clear why in that case  the  former  MP  was  assured  she  would  be
       released on reporting conditions once she had  been  questioned.  The
       same assurance is said to  have  been  given  on  the  father's  2016
       detention, and the same must apply to it.

    ii.       Again at 60 (1), the personal visits said to have  been  made
       by the  lawyer  and  the  former  MP  to  the  police  station  might
       reasonably have been taken to suggest that their representations were
       oral.

    iii.      requires separate treatment: see below.

    iv.       Nor is there much in the point at 60 (2) about  the  lawyer's
       bar membership card not giving his full name: while  of  course  Call
       certificates in this country all do so, there is  no  evidence  about
       the general form of annual membership cards in Sri Lanka,  while  the
       lawyer's headed paper gives his professional name in the  same  form.
       However the judge prefaced this comment by 'also',  and  clearly  did
       not consider it of prime importance.

    v. At 55, while the  judge  was  right  in  saying  that  the  father's
       detention had not been mentioned in the further submissions of  March
       2017 themselves, the appellant  had  evidently  mentioned  it  to  Dr
       Dhumad in the report he gave of their meeting on the 18th.  While  it
       is certainly odd that the solicitors should not  have  mentioned  it,
       that is a reflection on  them  professionally,  rather  than  on  the
       appellant's credibility. However, looking at the passage cited  as  a
       whole, it is quite clear that the judge's real point  was  about  the
       very late submission of the supporting evidence: from her use of  the
       plural 'claims', it can be seen that she was also  referring  to  the
       one about the detention of the appellant's wife. Since this  was  not
       said to have happened till November 2017, of course it could not have
       been referred to in the March submissions; but  no  reason  has  been
       given for why evidence of it could not have been provided sooner than
       the day before the hearing in June 2018.



12. The grounds themselves take the point about late submission of evidence
    at iii, together with another on the judge's treatment of  the  British
    High Commission  statistics  at  61.  It  is  argued  that,  since  the
    presenting officer had not asked for an  adjournment  for  verification
    purposes, what that might or might not have revealed was irrelevant.  I
    disagree: as I suggested to Mrs Bayati in the course of  argument,  the
    appellant's solicitors were not entitled to file potentially  important
    evidence so late that it put pressure on the  presenting  officer,  and
    the judge, to let it go in, rather than waste court time, and  discount
    the public interest in having cases of this kind  heard  sooner  rather
    than later, by a last-minute adjournment.

13. While once again this may have been the solicitors' fault, rather  than
    the appellant's  own, it left the judge in the position  of  having  to
    assess his credibility on the basis of documentary evidence  which  the
    respondent had had no proper opportunity to verify, and she was clearly
    entitled to take account of that.

14. As for the British High Commission letter, Mrs Bayati  argued  that  it
    effectively dealt with what may only have been a small  sample  of  all
    the lawyers' letters of this kind. It is  worth  looking  at  what  the
    British High Commission said in more detail. While it is possible  that
    the Home Office had referred to  them  letters  which  gave  cause  for
    concern, there must also have been many cases, like this  one,  and  on
    the basis of a good many years of experience of hearing asylum  appeals
    at first instance, where documents were simply filed too late for  them
    to be checked. The only possible analysis  was  of  the  letters  which
    actually were checked, and I will turn to the details of it.

15. The total number of lawyers' letters checked was 30: out  of  these,  7
    were cases where the lawyer confirmed sending  the  letter,  but  their
    statements about live court cases or arrest warrants were shown  to  be
    wrong on checking with the courts  or  police.  In  4,  apparently  all
    involving  one  lawyer,  no   other   documents   were   provided   for
    verification; but his credibility  was  questionable,  since  the  copy
    letter he produced did not correspond to the one submitted  over  here.
    In 6 cases the lawyer's  professional  credentials  were  found  to  be
    false, and 11 lawyers could not be contacted. In  one  of  these  cases
    there was no supporting documentation by  way  of  court  documents  or
    arrest warrants, while in nine such documents were found  to  be  false
    when checks were made.  In  one  case  the  supporting  documents  were
    genuine. In two cases the lawyer confirmed that  the  letters  did  not
    come from them. These figures (7, 4, 6, 11 and 2) add up to exactly 30,
    so there is no double counting involved.

16. One might quarrel with the statistical method behind  the  analysis  in
    the next paragraph, which takes the percentage of  unreliable  lawyers'
    letters in each category, and adds it up, so  reaching  the  figure  of
    86.7% noted by the judge, rather than looking at the combined figure on
    all of them. However, taking that approach would  mean  that  only  one
    letter out of 30 contained genuine supporting documents,  even  if  the
    writer could not be contacted. That gives the percentage of  unreliable
    cases as 96.7, rounding up to the nearest whole number.



17. Admittedly the sample was not large, so a strictly statistical approach
    might not have been justifiable;  but  it  included  all  the  lawyers'
    letters the British High Commission had been asked to check, and  their
    inquiries were clearly thorough. If  the  judge  had  relied  on  their
    findings to reject any Sri  Lankan  lawyer's  letter  out  of  hand  as
    unreliable, then she would of course have been wrong; but that  is  not
    what she did at 61. She simply set out the  British  High  Commission's
    own final comment, that their findings inclined them to be cautious  in
    accepting assertions in letters from Sri Lankan  lawyers,  where  there
    were no supporting documents to verify them, or be verified themselves.



18. Mrs Bayati pointed out that the letters relied on in this case had come
    direct to the appellant's solicitors, the  one  about  the  appellant's
    father's detention at his request, and the other following a  telephone
    conversation between them and the former MP. I do not think it  can  be
    said that this made the letter about  the  father  any  more  reliable:
    politicians, present or past, do not seem to have been included in  the
    British High Commission's survey, and more store might reasonably  have
    been set by a direct communication from such a person.

19. However once again the judge was doing no more than treating letters of
    this general kind with caution, where there were no documents to verify
    them, and this was the importance of what she said at 62. Of course, as
    Mrs Bayati pointed out, no court  documents  or  arrest  warrants  were
    likely to have  been  generated  by  short  periods  of  detention  for
    inquiries. Even so, the judge was entitled to consider what  there  was
    to support the letters relied on.

20. Looking at all the points together, both those made by the judge and in
    the grounds, it is clear that those at 60, and challenged at i, ii  and
    iv, could not have justified a negative credibility  finding  on  their
    own; but neither would they cast any real doubt on  the  judge's  other
    points, if those  were  justifiable  themselves.  So  far  as  that  is
    concerned, while she would not have been justified, on the basis of  Dr
    Dhumad's first report, in regarding  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    father's detention as a recent invention, she  was  fully  entitled  to
    treat the evidence to support both that and his wife's  detention  with
    considerable caution, given how late it was put in. There was a further
    reason  for  caution  in  the  British  High   Commission's   findings,
    particularly in the case of the lawyer's letter. There was  nothing  to
    support either letter by way of verifiable  evidence,  whether  or  not
    that was to be expected in the circumstances.

21. At 57 the judge took a view, which is not challenged, and to which  she
    was  fully  entitled  about  the  claimed  nature  of  the  appellant's
    activities in this country. She went on to point out there  and  at  58
    that this would not, on the country guidance, be likely to make  him  a
    subject of adverse interest on the part of the Sri Lankan  authorities.
    That leaves no real explanation for why they should  nevertheless  have
    detained both his father and his wife for questioning about  what  both
    the  lawyer  and  the  former  MP  said  were  regarded  as   terrorist
    activities, but assured both interveners that they  would  be  released
    once that was over, which duly happened.



22. While the judge's credibility  decision  does  contain  what  might  be
    described as the slightly over-enthusiastic points made at 60,  bearing
    in mind not only the very late submission of the  supporting  evidence,
    and the findings of the British High Commission, but the  realities  of
    the situation, as I have set them out at 21, the result was one she was
    entitled to reach, in a decision over which she clearly  took  a  great
    deal of care. The result is that her asylum  decision  stands,  and  so
    does her decision on human rights, leaving the  appellant's  status  in
    this    country     protected,     if     not     as     a     refugee.



Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)

                                        Dated:  03.10.2018


