
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13159/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2017                            |On 10 November 2017           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     hc
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Trussler, Counsel instructed by Kinas
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision promulgated  on  27  July  2017  allowing  the
    appeal of [HC] on asylum grounds.  The decision that was made by First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  T.  Jones  was  that,  on  consideration  of  the
    evidence, the challenges made by the Secretary of State were  not  made
    out, that the appellant was a credible witness and  that  he  had  been
    trafficked and would be trafficked or at risk if  he  returned  to  his
    home.  That is the conclusion that the judge reaches in paragraph 59 of
    the decision. As a result he allowed the appeal of [HC].  I shall refer
    to [HC] as 'the appellant' as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The problem with the way this case was approached was that on the  very
    day of the hearing and before the appellant had had an  opportunity  to
    look at it, the Secretary of State produced a letter from the competent
    authority in  relation  to  the  Trafficking  Convention  and  what  is
    referred to as 'the  NRM  decision'.  This  arises  from  the  National
    Referral Mechanism,  a  body  which  is  tasked  with  identifying  and
    supporting victims of trafficking.  The Border Agency, as it then  was,
    is the competent authority for making decisions, and  consequently,  to
    that extent it is a very unusual position where  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State under the guise of the  competent  authority  has  a
    distinct and very different function from the  normal  decision  making
    process.  That is clear from the decision in  AS  (Afghanistan)  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1469  in
    which Longmore LJ gave the decision of the Court of Appeal  with  which
    the other two Lord Justices agreed.

 3. It is not an easy matter to contemplate, all the  more  so  since  this
    particular report was thrust on the appellant at a very late stage  and
    the appellant himself was only provided with a limited  opportunity  to
    take  instructions.   Mr  Trussler,  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant at the First-tier Tribunal, did his level best  to  obtain  a
    statement and did so and presented that to the judge, but as far as  we
    are aware, neither the judge nor the Presenting Officer  was  aware  of
    the decision in AS (Afghanistan).

 4. The significance of the decision is in the approach that the First-tier
    Tribunal has to adopt in relation to a 'conclusive'  decision.   It  is
    not like a decision in an earlier appeal made by  a  judge  and,  using
    Devaseelan principles, becomes the starting point, but no more; nor  is
    it like an ordinary decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  which  the
    Tribunal is free to agree  or  disagree  with  and  to  substitute  its
    findings as appropriate.   It has a particular status and that  emerges
    principally from the Trafficking Convention and the  National  Referral
    Mechanism which requires the competent  authority  to  make  decisions.
    Clearly, it is a decision which can be reviewed, but it is  clear  that
    the basis of the review of a decision made by the  competent  authority
    is a challenge on public law principles, namely, amongst other  things,
    whether it is perverse or irrational.  This emerges from  paragraph  14
    of the judgment in AS (Afghanistan).

 5. It is as well to bear in mind that AS (Afghanistan) was  a  case  where
    the decision of the competent authority was indeed  very  questionable.
    On the facts it seems that it  was  perverse,  although  the  Court  of
    Appeal drew back from  reaching  that  conclusion.   What  is  said  in
    paragraph 7 of the decision is:

         "This decision could be said to be questionable in that Ms  Farrell
         appears to have accepted AS's account of what actually happened  to
         him namely that he was kept captive and required to work until 'the
         debt' was repaid.  Although this appears on any view to be  'forced
         labour', Ms Farrell seems to think that it  would  only  be  forced
         labour if suffered by someone under 18.  There does not  appear  to
         be any warrant for  this  in  the  Trafficking  Convention  or  the
         Guidance issued by the Home Office for Competent Authorities.   If,
         therefore, a challenge to Ms Farrell's decision had been mounted by
         way  of   judicial   review,   on   the   grounds   of   Wednesbury
         unreasonableness, any such challenge might have had  some  prospect
         of success."

 6. I do not think I would be overstepping my function by  saying  that  on
    the  evidence  in  AS  (Afghanistan)  the  decision  of  the  competent
    authority was on its face a perverse one and was unlawful.  Longmore LJ
    in the Court of Appeal was having to grapple with the weight that is to
    be attached to a decision of the  competent  authority  which,  on  any
    sensible view, could not be  said  to  be  lawful.   He  said  this  in
    paragraph 14:

         "If the First Tier Tribunal is entitled  to  take  into  account  a
         decision that an appellant is (or has been) a victim of trafficking
         it seems odd that, if a perverse decision has been reached that  an
         appellant has not been a victim of trafficking, the Tribunal cannot
         consider whether the facts of the case do, in fact, show  that  the
         appellant was a victim of trafficking. ... The mere fact  that  the
         Competent Authority has  made  a  decision  which  on  analysis  is
         perverse  cannot  prevent  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  judge   from
         considering the evidence about trafficking which is  placed  before
         him; nor can it, in my  judgment,  be  relevant  that  no  judicial
         review proceedings have been taken by the applicant in  respect  of
         the Competent Authority's decision".

 7. It follows from that line of argument that  the  competent  authority's
    decision is a decision which can be challenged.  Although it is  called
    a 'conclusive decision', it is a decision which can be challenged,  but
    it is apparent that it can be  challenged  on  public  law  grounds  on
    principles which may include being Wednesbury  unreasonable.   Although
    it may well extend to the other heads of challenge known in public  law
    terms, there is no reason to think that the  judge  had  in  mind  this
    distinction.   It  does  not  emerge  from  the  decision  itself  and,
    unsurprisingly, the judge did not have the benefit of any  research  on
    the relevance of AS (Afghanistan).  In these circumstances  I  consider
    that the process was fundamentally unfair: a late document was produced
    without realising what were the ramifications in legal  terms  of  that
    lately produced document.

 8. The way the judge approached it was perfectly  understandable  were  it
    not for the decision in AS (Afghanistan).  He went through  the  letter
    and simply reached conclusions which disagreed with it.  I  need  refer
    only to one example.  In paragraph 17 of  the  decision  the  competent
    authority considered a part of the appellant's account where  he  spent
    two weeks in Greece in July 2014.  It was said that these were not  the
    actions of somebody who was under the influence  of  traffickers.   His
    account was stated in these terms:-

         "You further state that in July 2014 the men took you to Greece for
         ten days during which time they made you beg on the beaches.  Again
         these actions are believed to be inconsistent.  It is  unclear  why
         they would take the risk and the expense of  transporting  a  child
         illegally across  the  international  borders  to  beg  for  money,
         something they already had you doing within Albania".

 9. Now, the response to that is found in the  statement  and  it  says  in
    paragraph 9, in response to the passage in paragraph 17 I have  quoted,
    'I can only assume I was taken to Greece to  make  more  money,  but  I
    didn't make more money so I was taken back  to  Albania.'   That  is  a
    perfectly permissible response if what one  was  dealing  with  was  an
    ordinary letter by the Secretary of State which was the  subject  of  a
    statutory appeal.  It is very different when  it  comes  to  perversity
    because, in my judgement, it could not  be  said  that  the  conclusion
    reached in paragraph 17 of the letter of the  competent  authority  was
    perverse.  Looking in the context of this case as  a  whole,  a  10-day
    trip to Greece as a victim of further  trafficking  was  a  matter  the
    credibility of which the decision maker was fully entitled to consider.
     It is clear that the decision maker did  not  find  it  credible.   He
    expressed it in terms of being inconsistent, but what he meant was that
    he did not believe it.  Why should these traffickers take somebody  for
    a two week spree  to  Greece  and  (presumably  at  considerable  cost)
    maintain  control  over  him,  such  that  he  would  fall  within  the
    definition of somebody who was  being  trafficked.   He  dismissed  the
    objection made by the competent authority and concluded, not simply  on
    relation to this element but in respect of all the other elements, that
    the appellant was credible.  In doing so I am satisfied that the  judge
    got it wrong.

10. I do not suggest that there are not difficult decisions to  deal  with.
    On the one hand there is a decision made which has not  been  subjected
    to a judicial review, and no criticism can be made that  this  was  not
    carried through.  Here, however,  is  a  decision  which  can  only  be
    challenged on Wednesbury grounds.   Compare  this  with  the  appellant
    himself who gives evidence, who gives an account which is, according to
    the judge who hears it, a credible account.  It  must  therefore  place
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge in a particular position  of  difficulty.
    But that difficulty  cannot  be  resolved  by  simply  not  taking  any
    cognisance of the fact that  we  are  dealing  with  a  decision  by  a
    competent authority which has  a  particularly  distinct  and  discrete
    place in the pantheon of decisions  made  by  decision  makers  in  the
    process of immigration control.     I am satisfied the judge's approach
    skewed his decision on  credibility  and  consequently  his  conclusion
    found in paragraph 59 that he was satisfied as to the appellant's claim
    that he would be trafficked if returned to his home.

DECISION
   1. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error on a point of law.
   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
   3. I direct that  the  decision  is  to  be  re-made  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
