
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13026/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2018                            |On 13 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Rawand [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by TLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  In a  decision  sent  on  26
         January 2016 Judge Lodge of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed
         his appeal against the  decision  made  by  the  respondent  on  25
         November 2017 to refuse his protection claim.

    2.   The principal ground advanced by the appellant is that the judge's
         adverse credibility assessment took  an  irrelevant  and  incorrect
         factor into account.  This is said to have arisen in paragraph 45:

             "45. In the light of my findings  above  with  regard  to  the
                  appellant's  credibility  I  reject  his  claim  that  his
                  uncle's house was burnt down and all the  documents  lost.
                  In the absence of anything to support  that  contention  I
                  find it far too convenient that a little  over  two  weeks
                  after he said he could provide his ID  he  telephones  his
                  uncle to find that the house has  been  attacked  and  the
                  documents destroyed.  I am satisfied his CSID is available
                  to him that it is either at his family home (his  father's
                  home) or failing that at his uncle's.  All he  has  to  do
                  when he lands in Iraq is ask for it."

    3.   It was pointed out that the judge simply  misunderstood  the  fact
         that  whereas  the  asylum  interview  took  place  in  2016,   the
         information regarding the raid on the appellant's uncle's home  had
         come into being in October 2017.

    4.   At the outset of the hearing Mrs Aboni stated that the  respondent
         accepted that the judge had fallen into error in paragraph  45  and
         this amounted to a material error.  In reply to questions  from  me
         she confirmed that the respondent's position was that she  did  not
         oppose the appellant's appeal.

    5.   In light of  this  concession  I  conclude  that  the  appellant's
         grounds establish that the FtT Judge materially erred  in  law  and
         that his decision must be set aside.

    6.   I see no alternative to the decision being remitted  to  the  FtT.
         Mrs Aboni sought to submit that the case could be retained  in  the
         UT, but when asked by me the basis for such a submission  she  said
         it was because there was no error in the judge's assessment of  the
         appellant's  circumstances  on  return,   only   as   regards   the
         practicality of return in view  of  the  appellant's  situation  as
         regards obtaining a CSID.  The difficulty with that  submission  is
         twofold.  First, she had earlier conceded that  the  judge's  error
         regarding the CSID matter was a material one and had said  she  did
         not oppose the  appellant's  grounds  which  had  argued  that  the
         judge's error when assessing  the  CSID  matter  had  infected  his
         overall credibility assessment.  Second, in AA (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA
         Civ  944  the  Court  of  Appeal  decided  that  the  issue  of  an
         applicant's ability to obtain a CSID could not be severed from  the
         overall  risk  assessment  and  was  not  simply  (as  the  UT  had
         previously said) limited  to  the  issue  of  the  practicality  of
         return.

    7.   That  said,  it  may  well  be  the  appellant  faces  significant
         difficulties in resisting  the  respondent's  submission  that  his
         account contains a number of shortcomings.




    8.   For the above reasons I conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error  of  law.
    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Lodge).

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 7 November 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
