
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13610/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th August 2017                   |On 28th September 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E M DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     a o
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Vinita Templeton of Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Geoffrey Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
    Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify them or any member of  their  family.   This  order
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Appellant and Appeal

 2. The Appellant is a Palestinian national from Gaza.  He asserts risk  on
    return from Al Qassam who he describes as a military faction of  Hamas.
     He explains that in 2014 there was a 50-day war and in the  last  days
    of the war he went to give blood in the area  of  conflict  and  helped
    first aid workers move the injured and  dead.   As  a  result  of  that
    involvement two armed Al Qassam  militiamen  came  to  his  house  days
    before the war ended, with their faces covered, calling him by name and
    accusing him of betraying them by reporting their position so that they
    got hit by the Israelis.  His mother intervened and in  the  stress  of
    the moment had a heart incident. Local  people  came  to  his  and  his
    mother's aid and the Al Qassam members left. His mother had  to  go  to
    hospital. He fled for fear of the  militiamen.  The  Appellant  asserts
    that he initially travelled to Egypt where he found out that his mother
    had died.  He then spent time in Turkey and  Greece  and  arrived,  via
    France, in the United Kingdom in May 2016 and  claimed  asylum  on  the
    same day.

 3. There was a screening interview in  May  2016  and  the  Appellant  was
    interviewed on 17th and 24th November 2016, and the claim  was  refused
    on 25th November 2016.

 4.  The   Respondent   rejected   the   Appellant's   claim   because   of
    inconsistencies in his account, the vagueness of his explanation as  to
    why he had come to the attention of Al Qassam and his ability to escape
    them, the lateness of the account as he did not say at  screening  that
    he had any fear of Al Qassam, failure to claim asylum having  travelled
    through Italy and France, and  the contradictory travel history when he
    said at screening in May 2016 that he had  left  Palestine  in  January
    2016.  Following that interview he wrote via Crowley Company Solicitors
    to say that in fact he had left Palestine in early 2014.  At his  first
    substantive asylum interview of 17th November 2016 he said that he  had
    left Palestine in September 2016.

 5. The Appellant lodged a Notice of Appeal through  Albany  Solicitors  on
    8th December 2016, filed his reply in person on 22nd December 2016, and
    appeared in person before the First-tier Tribunal  at  the  hearing  on
    17th January 2017.

The First-tier Tribunal

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard the Appellant's evidence but  found
    that he had not established his claim to the lower standard. The  judge
    agreed with the Respondent that the background evidence shows that  had
    Al Qassam been sufficiently motivated to punish  the  Appellant  as  an
    Israeli spy who had enabled Israel to pinpoint their positions so as to
    successfully target them  it would  have  been  unlikely  that,  having
    located him at home, they would be deflected from taking him, but  even
    if that were true   they  would  have  then  pursued  him  with  active
    enquiries which would have become known to him through  his  uncle  who
    facilitated his flight, and whom the judge found  the  Appellant  would
    have maintained contact with, and yet  there was  no  evidence  of  any
    interest in him.  The judge did not hold it against the Appellant  that
    he had failed to claim asylum in Italy or France.  The judge  found  it
    significant that the Appellant had failed to disclose any  fear  of  Al
    Qassam as the basis for his asylum claim when he  first  made  it,  and
    rejected the Appellant's  explanation,  namely  that  he  feared  being
    returned to one of  the  countries  through  which  he  had  travelled,
    concluding that that made  no  sense  in  the  context  of  failing  to
    describe accurately the basis of the claim.

 7. The Appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal in person  asserting  that
    errors had been made by the judge because:

      a) the general humanitarian  situation  in  the  occupied  Palestinian
         territory had been recognised as being so severe to make removal  a
         breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

      b) the Appellant could not be returned to the Palestinian  authorities
         as he had lost his papers

      c) the crossing through Egypt is in any event only open irregularly.

      d) The assessment of credibility was flawed because:

          i)  when the judge says, the Appellant had failed  to  mention  a
             fear of Al Qassam at the first interview he was wrong:

               1) "but  I  did.   I  did  mention  them  in  my  substantive
                  interview."

         ii) In terms of the discrepant evidence of his travel he says that
             when the judge mentions that the Appellant had  corrected  his
             interview via his then solicitors on 17th June 2016 he  failed
             to appreciate

               1) "I only saw  my  solicitor  briefly  and  was  only  asked
                  vaguely if I wanted to change anything,  it  was  not  the
                  detailed  examination  of  my  evidence  that  the   judge
                  assumes,  and  this  has   affected   his   view   of   my
                  credibility."

        iii) the judge had held it against the Appellant that he had failed
             to claim asylum in the safe third country.

 8. Permission was granted on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal relied
    on inconsistencies said  to  arise  from  the  Appellant's  substantive
    interview which had not been rebutted.  The  record  of  the  interview
    indicates that he was unrepresented and the record of  the  proceedings
    does not show that all of the alleged discrepancies were  put  to  him.
    Further that the judge may have erred in concluding  that  because  the
    Appellant was not executed by Al Qassam he was not of interest to  them
    and would remain so.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 9. Ms Templeton did not rely on the Grounds  of  Appeal  relating  to  the
    route to return or country conditions, neither of which, in the context
    of the  country  guidance  case  are  points  which  could  assist  the
    Appellant.  The  Appellant's  application,  submitted  when  acting  in
    person, relies on partial and incomplete quotes from  the  Respondent's
    country information and guidance,  and  incorrectly  asserts  that  the
    Respondent accepts that an Article  15(c)  position  based  on  country
    conditions exists in the Palestinian authority, and further incorrectly
    asserts that the Respondent concedes the country guidance  case  is  no
    longer applicable.  Whilst it is apparent that the  judge  inexplicably
    refers to the operational guidance note  of  March  2013,  inexplicable
    because the Respondent points out in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    that there is June 2015 country information and guidance, in the  event
    nothing turns on the mistaken reference,  as  the  conclusions  on  the
    updated evidence is not significantly different.

10. Ms Templeton argued  that  the  challenge  was  to  the  assessment  of
    credibility.

11. Ms Templeton  said  that  contrary  to  the  grant  of  permission  the
    Appellant's  case  was  not  that  the  discrepancies  were  not  fully
    explained or put to him in the hearing but rather it was as a result of
    the thoroughness of the judge's process  that  the  Appellant  came  to
    understand, for the first time, his  difficulties,  and  to  appreciate
    that there must have been significant interpretation  problems  at  the
    substantive interviews. This was why he said for the  first  time  that
    difficulties must have arisen  through  interpretation.  There  was  no
    criticism of the conduct of the hearing.

12. Ms Templeton submitted the Appellant's reliance, for the first time, on
    significant interpretation difficulties before  the  judge  should  not
    have counted adversely because the Appellant had not  had  any  earlier
    opportunity to appreciate that there must be  interpreter  errors.  Her
    instructions  are  that  initially  represented  by  Crowley   and   Co
    solicitors at the time of the screening interview,  there  had  been  a
    change in representation by the time of the substantive interviews,  to
    Albany Solicitors and those solicitors  withdrew  their  representation
    following the refusal letter, before they  had  taken  instructions  or
    given advice on the interviews, the last of which had only been the day
    before the reasons for refusal.  On that evidence the Appellant had not
    had  the  opportunity  to  understand  the  difficulties  or  to   give
    instructions about them. On that chronology, the solicitors  would  not
    have had the opportunity to make  written  representations  as  to  the
    interpretation at the interview, and so the fact that nothing had  been
    mentioned prior should not have counted against the Appellant.

13. Departing from the grounds upon which permission had  been  granted  Ms
    Templeton sought to argue there was unfairness of process in  that  the
    Respondent's decision and the  judge's  hearing  had  proceeded  on  an
    incorrect factual basis namely that the interpretation of the interview
    was  correct,  when  it  was  defective.   Ms  Templeton  made  a  late
    application under Rule 15(2A) to submit new evidence to show  that  the
    Asylum Interview Records relied upon by the Respondent in their  bundle
    were not accurate, in that the Home Office interpreter had made  errors
    of interpretation in the first substantive  asylum  interview  on  17th
    November 2016.

14. Ms Templeton sought forbearance for the late addition of the ground and
    production of the evidence, the day of the hearing. She  explained  the
    ground only became available following the receipt of the  transcripts.
    The Appellant had previously been represented  by  others  and  it  had
    taken time to obtain the file and then apply for the  transcripts.  The
    processes of having to arrange funding for an interpreter to listen  to
    the audio tapes, obtaining his services including  his  endorsement  of
    the home office transcripts, the typing up of  that  evidence  and  the
    preparation of the witness statements, all within  the  confines  of  a
    busy office, with people away on leave over the summer, and the obvious
    necessity of  delegating  tasks,  meant  that  the  position  had  only
    recently become clear.

15. Mr Harrison for  the  Respondent  objected  to  the  late  application,
    permission had been granted in June, and the documents  were  only  now
    being submitted. Mr Harrison argued that I should refuse to  permit  an
    amendment  to  the  grounds  or  admit  the   evidence   of   the   new
    interpretation, and it was right for me to do so without looking at  it
    simply because it was submitted so late, and in any event, there  would
    be no proper basis to me to choose one over the other.

16. Ms Templeton clarified the Appellant had a screening interview  in  May
    2016 and two substantive interviews, the first  on  the  17th  November
    2016 and the second on the 24th November 2016. The  Appellant  did  not
    rely on any significant error in the second  substantive  interview  of
    the  24th  November.  The  interpreter  had  listened  to  a   complete
    recording, endorsed handwritten notes on the  Respondent's  transcript,
    and those were in the supplemental bundle, but they did not reveal  any
    significant  discrepancy.  Accordingly,  the  representative  had   not
    undertaken the expense  of  typing  up  the  Appellant's  interpreter's
    version of the audio tape.

17. Ms Templeton submitted it was the new transcript of the audio recording
    of  17th  November  2016  which   showed   the   Appellant   had   been
    misinterpreted. The tape was incomplete because it stopped at  question
    44. The interview ran to 58. I  checked,  but  Ms  Templeton  explained
    there was no application to adjourn because the differences apparent in
    the interpretation  of  the  first  44  questions  were  sufficient  to
    establish the error.

18. I decided that it was necessary for me to have regard to  the  evidence
    to decide whether to permit the change in the grounds and to admit  the
    evidence. The skeleton did not particularise the point but relied  only
    on the fact of the interpreter finding significance difference with the
    version of the first substantive interview of 17  November  2016,  upon
    which the respondent and the Judge had placed reliance.

19. I indicated that given the scant skeleton and the import of the  point,
    I required Ms Templeton to take me through it in detail,  to  ensure  I
    understood the interpreter errors relied upon,  and  in  that  process,
    afford the Respondent's representative a fair chance of seeing how  the
    evidence was relied upon and providing him an  opportunity  to  address
    the application.

20.  Time  was  then  devoted  to  the  comparison   of   the   Appellant's
    interpreter's version of the interview and  that  in  the  Home  Office
    bundle. I took a discursive approach and  taking  every  question  went
    through each in turn analysing what if any difference  there  were  and
    their import for the discrepancies relied upon by the Respondent in the
    reasons for refusal and those held significant by the judge.

21. What it came down to was this:

      a) When the Respondent said that the Appellant had been  inconsistent,
         saying that the militia men had come to him two days before the war
         ended but subsequently in the second interview on the 24th November
         (about which there is no issue)  had  been  emphatic  that  it  was
         exactly eight days before the  end  of  the  war,  the  Appellant's
         interpreter interpreted that he had said four days and  then  eight
         days.

      b) Either way the evidence was discrepant, and that was the  force  of
         the respondent's point.

      c)   Similarly   adjusting   the   chronology   to   the   Appellant's
         interpretation leaves intact the Respondent's point that on  either
         chronology offered by the Appellant his evidence as to when he left
         Palestine is not consistent with any version.

      d) Nor does the Appellant's interpretation alter the evidence  of  the
         Appellant that his mother had the heart attack when the  Al  Qassam
         militia men tried to abduct him when he was 18 years old,  and  yet
         his chronology would have made him 19.

22. In submissions Mr Harrison relied on the rule 24 response to the  point
    that the judge was right to conclude that the account of interest by Al
    Qassam ran contrary to the country information and that  the  Appellant
    had failed to provide adequate  explanations  for  the  adverse  points
    relied upon in the reasons for refusal, and even now the late evidence,
    which in his view I should not admit, did not provide such. As revealed
    by my detailed examination in open court of each question  and  answer,
    and  the  asserted  differences  in  interpretation,  the   differences
    asserted did not address the significant  discrepancies  identified  by
    the judge.  Reading the judge's  decision  in  the  round  taking  into
    account  all  of  the  reasons,  and  the  evidence   of   the   second
    interpretation, it was clear that the judge's decision would have  been
    the same.  This is not a case like  MM  (Unfairness:  E  and  R)  Sudan
    [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) where unknown to the judge the Appellant had in
    fact submitted evidence to the Respondent asserting that the  interview
    record was wrong.  In that case the Respondent had failed to  put  that
    information before the judge, that was unfair. It had led to the  judge
    concluding that when the Appellant said that  she  had  submitted  such
    evidence she was in fact lying.  The new evidence  brought  forward  in
    that case quite clearly showed that she  was  not.  Here  there  was  a
    second interpretation which took the Appellant's position no further.

23. In reply Miss Templeton pointed out  that  whilst  the  discrepancy  in
    respect of the Appellant's age relied upon by the reasons  for  refusal
    remained, that was a peripheral matter, and whilst it  was  right  that
    even with the  new  interpretation  the  discrepancy  as  to  when  the
    incident occurred remained, it was simply  unfair  for  a  case  to  be
    determined without an  accurate  interpretation.   The  most  important
    point is that the judge did not accept that had the Appellant  been  of
    interest to Al Qassam he would have been able to get away and  the  new
    interpretation gave a  much  better  flavour  of  the  chaos  that  the
    Appellant claimed was the explanation for the two armed  gunmen  losing
    control of the situation and having to leave.

24. So far as the complaints about the delay of providing the  evidence  it
    was simply a matter of practicalities but in any  event  even  had  the
    interpretation been provided earlier the reality is that the Respondent
    did not in any event have the power to withdraw the decision.

25. Both representatives agreed that in the event that I decided  to  admit
    the evidence, I would be in a position  to  decide  the  error  of  law
    without further hearing.

Discussion

26. Mr Harrison repeated his  objection  to  the  late  production  of  the
    evidence but did not seek to persuade me that I should not consider the
    merits of the ground raising issues of fairness in  light  of  the  two
    interpretations available to me.  This is an Asylum case, the  duty  is
    of anxious scrutiny, the error asserted is one concerning  fairness  of
    process and in particular whether or not  the  Judge  had  the  correct
    factual matrix before him in terms of what the Appellant's account,  as
    he had set it out to the Respondent. I am  satisfied  that  could  come
    within the principle of an error of fact  capable  of  constituting  an
    error of law.  I am satisfied that it is right for  me  to  permit  the
    enlargement of the grounds and to admit the evidence of the corrections
    made to the interview transcripts by the  Appellant's  interpreter.  In
    considering questions of unfairness my approach must be to look at  the
    substance,  and  not  to  be   overly   concerned   with   matters   of
    technicalities.  It is in  this  context  that  I  ensured  during  the
    hearing, and, with the agreement  of  the  representatives  adopting  a
    somewhat informal discursive approach and  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    evidence  was  only  served  on  the  day,  that  I  went  through  the
    alternative interpretations provided by the parties in  detail,  and  I
    have read every question and answer.

27. The audio recording  for  44  to  58  was  not  made  available.   Miss
    Templeton did not seek an adjournment. The Appellant has raised nothing
    specific to those  parts  of  the  interview  in  his  grounds  and  Ms
    Templeton   did not take me to anything in the reasons for  refusal  or
    judge's decision which significantly relied upon  any  matters  arising
    from those sections. Taking account  of  the  overriding  objective  to
    determine the appeal fairly and justly I saw no reason to  adjourn.  Of
    the 44 questions the first 39 are unremarkable.  Accordingly, the focus
    at the hearing was on questions 40 to 44.

28. The judge restricted  himself  to  inconsistencies  identified  by  the
    Respondent as being significant in the reasons for refusal and reminded
    himself that because the Appellant was unrepresented and had  suggested
    that there may have been errors of interpretation during his  interview
    he needed to  be  careful  about  giving  weight  to  the  Respondent's
    concerns.

29. The Appellant asserts the judge was wrong to hold it against  him  that
    he had not mentioned his fear  of  Al  Qassam  when  first  interviewed
    because he had mentioned it at  the  first  substantive  interview.  Ms
    Templeton did not pursue the point.

30. Judge Travaskis noted that in respect of the  screening  interview  the
    Appellant, at a time when he had been legally  represented  by  Crowley
    and Co, had written to clarify matters.  Accordingly,  the  corrections
    made at that time could be presumed to be complete  and  in  accordance
    with the Appellant's instructions. Corrections which did not arise from
    interpreter error but from, as the Appellant admits, the fact  that  he
    had lied.

31. The judge found it adverse that the Appellant, through Crowley  and  Co
    Solicitors wrote  to  the  Respondent  after  the  May  2016  screening
    interview to correct his evidence, but did not take the opportunity  to
    amend his claim to include a fear of Al Qassam.

32. In his grounds the Appellant said that this was a rushed interview  and
    he did not have the chance to fully explain to Crowley and Co what else
    he had said wrong  or  to  elaborate  on  the  reasons  for  his  being
    frightened to return to Palestine. There is no merit in that.

      a) The information provided about the travel itinerary is detailed and
         specific. He changed his evidence of when he left  Palestine,  from
         early 2016 to  January  2015,  when  caught  out  by  finger  print
         evidence in the interview. Then through Crowley and Co  he  amended
         it to early 2014,  and  revealed  that  he  had  tried  to  get  to
         Macedonia but being unsuccessful had returned to Turkey, and  lived
         there for a year before embarking on the  journey  again.  He  said
         that he had left Palestine in early 2014. Subsequently he  said  in
         his asylum interview he had left in September 2014. The  Respondent
         notes that even that date is inconsistent  with  the  chronological
         account  that  he  gives.   It  remains  so  even  with   the   new
         interpretation. The argument that he did not get it  right  because
         he was rushed does not add up.

      b) In Crowley and Co's representations the Appellant  having  admitted
         that he had not told the truth when he said he had not been finger-
         printed because, as was pointed out to him, he had been, in Greece,
         offered the explanation that it was because he  was  frightened  of
         being returned there. The grounds assertion of a rushed job has  no
         traction here, his explanation has remained that he did not  do  so
         because he did not want to be sent back to Greece.

      c) I am satisfied that he had the opportunity to tell  his  solicitors
         he had a fear of Al Qassam, and, again contrary to his grounds,  it
         is clear that they specifically canvassed with him the  reasons  he
         had given for claiming asylum in order to be able  to  add  to  it.
         Further,  and  contrary  to  the  assertion  of  the  grounds,  the
         Appellant did take the opportunity of adding to his reasons for his
         claim.

          i) "The applicant wishes to add that  he  has  seen  friends  and
             neighbours killed and did not want to suffer the same fate."

      d) Significantly he did not  mention  the  claimed  incident  with  Al
         Qassam, or even his mother.

33. As Judge Trevaskis noted no difficulties in interpretation were  raised
    by the Appellant in respect of the  screening  interview  so  that  the
    points about the failure to refer to any fear of Al Qassam  when  first
    making his claim remained.  I find that his blaming the  solicitors  in
    this application appears expedient.

34. Judge Trevaskis noted that corrections had not been given to the record
    of the substantive interview.

35. Ms Templeton made much of the fact that the Appellant was unrepresented
    and so did not have the opportunity of correcting the interview and  in
    particular it was  only  at  the  hearing  that  he  realised  it  need
    correcting. The simple fact of the Appellant being  unrepresented,  and
    unable to obtain representation for the hearing, is  not  determinative
    of his assertion that he had no idea what was said in the  reasons  for
    refusal  letter,  and  the  discrepancies  relied  upon  therein.  Even
    allowing that it  might  be  established  that  he  could  only  access
    understanding through solicitors, the Appellant's position relies on  a
    failure solicitors to take instructions and advise on the  reasons  for
    refusal, so denying him the opportunity of  appreciating  earlier,  and
    mentioning  it  in  his  notice  of  appeal  for  example,   that   the
    Respondent's consideration  of  the  interview  in  those  reasons  for
    refusal "must" have been marred  by  interpreter  error.  Ms  Templeton
    tells  me  that  according  to  her  instructions  solicitors  withdrew
    representation following receipt of the notice of refusal, and  did  so
    without advising the Appellant on its contents, and  without  affording
    him an opportunity to give instructions on the reasons for refusal,  or
    on the merits of appealing.   There has been no complaint made  against
    the company. They are expert immigration advisors.  This  assertion  of
    Solicitor error does not bear scrutiny.

36. Ms Templeton places too much weight on  this  aspect.  Judge  Trevaskis
    does not place significant weight on the absence of any  correction  to
    the interview, but notes that there has  been  none.  He  assesses  the
    likelihood  of  interpreter  error  proving  an  explanation   of   the
    Appellant's difficulties in the round, taking into account that much of
    his credibility difficulties arose before he ever had  the  substantive
    interview and is not amenable to interpreter error as an explanation in
    any event, and the difficulties brought to his account by  the  country
    information. On the  evidence  on  the  day  he  was  entitled  to  his
    conclusion that interpreter error did not afford adequate explanation.

37. In the context of the arguments  put  forward  now  I  have  considered
    whether the evidence now provided shows that in fact interpreter  error
    could account for his difficulties. The evidence now submitted  results
    in the position of my being faced with two alternative  interpretations
    for part of the substantive interviews.

38. There was no evidential basis put before me  which  could  lead  me  to
    prefer one interpreter's ability over  the  other,  or  to  prefer  one
    interpretation over the other.  I note that the Appellant's interpreter
    is employed by an agency described as "24/7" and  has  worked  in  that
    capacity since 2014.  Although I do not  have  any  indication  of  his
    qualifications he was instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors, an  expert
    firm of immigration solicitors, and Mr Harrison took no issue with  his
    ability to provide interpretation, I am satisfied that he is qualified,
    but I am unable to compare the qualifications.  For similar reasons,  I
    can only assume that the interpreter used by the  Respondent  has  been
    assessed as being suitably and appropriately qualified.   I  take  into
    account that the  Home  Office  interpreter  is  providing  a  hands-on
    immediate interpretation, involving potential mishearing and having  to
    ask for repetition, which will  inevitably  mean  that  words  are  not
    exactly  repeated,  and  may  but  lead  to  omissions,  additions  and
    clarifications. His contemporaneous position is more difficult  because
    he must make sense of it there and then, seeking clarification  at  the
    time. The Home Office interpreter does not have the  added  ability  to
    pause or replay the interview in a calm and quiet environment.  I  note
    that the Respondent used the same interpreter for the  two  substantive
    interviews and that in respect of the interview of  24th  November  the
    Appellant's interpreter said that he found nothing of  any  significant
    difference. There is no evidential basis for me  to  conclude  anything
    other than that they are both independent and professional.

39. In broad terms the two  interpretations  reveal  that  the  Appellant's
    interpreter in some instances would have said more, and in  some  less,
    than the Home Office interpreter. There is a clear  difference  between
    them when at question 40 the Respondent has recorded the  Appellant  as
    having said that the incident  took  place  two  days  before  the  war
    finished, the alternative version says he said that the  incident  took
    place four days before  the  war  finished.   However,  in  the  second
    substantive interview, the interpretation of which is in effect agreed,
    the Appellant says that it was eight days prior to the  war  finishing.
    The inconsistency of the Appellant's account  of  the  timing  of  that
    incident therefore remains.

40. The Respondent was also concerned  that  the  Appellant  is  internally
    inconsistent when he says both that he himself took his mother  to  the
    hospital, and that he did not take his  mother  to  hospital  but  that
    others did.   Whilst  the  Home  Office  interpreter  provides  a  more
    succinct  interpretation  than  the   alternative   provided   by   the
    Appellant's translator, both confirm the inconsistency of  the  account
    of who took the mother to the hospital.

41. Additionally, both interpretations confirm that the Appellant said that
    he was  18  at  the  time  of  the  incident  so  that  the  identified
    inconsistency between that position and the Appellant's stated date  of
    birth which would make him 19 in September 2014 remains.

42. The discrepant evidence as to when the Appellant left Palestine is also
    plainly established.

43. In short,  the  new  evidence  does  not  establish  any  significantly
    misunderstood factual matrix.

44. Ms Templetons' point that merely the fact that the  interpretation  now
    provided shows a difference  with  the  version  before  the  judge  is
    sufficient to establish unfairness or an error of fact is misconceived.
    Contrary to Miss Templeton's submission there is no evidence before  me
    which can satisfactorily establish that  the  alternative  version  now
    submitted is to be preferred, but even if it  were,  careful  scrutiny,
    with full input from both representatives has resulted in showing  that
    the outcome would have been no different in terms of the assessment  of
    the Appellant's credibility in the light of those inconsistencies.

45. Miss Templeton's point that the judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to establish that members of the military wing  of  Hamas  would
    not have lost control in circumstances where they had  come  to  arrest
    the Appellant is not taken any further by consideration of  the  longer
    and more incoherent version of events  provided  by  the  Appellant  as
    described by the recently produced alternative interpretation.  It adds
    nothing to the Appellant's explanation that  having  arrived  with  the
    purpose of arresting and removing him for execution they were deflected
    from that purpose by the response of the Appellant's mother  and  those
    who came to the Appellant and his mother's aid.  The  ground  fails  to
    appreciate the significance of the judge's point that the claim that Al
    Qassam were so concerned about the Appellant's actions  in  Khamyounif,
    some hour's journey  from  his  place  of  residence,  so  as  to  have
    identified him and tracked him to his local area, is undermined by  the
    lack of evidence of any subsequent effort to apprehend him.  The  judge
    notes the assistance provided to the Appellant by his family  following
    the claimed incident with Al Qassam and rejects the explanation offered
    in oral evidence to him that he did not know whether Al Qassam had made
    efforts to find him because he had  not  maintained  contact  with  his
    family.

Decision

46. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    international protection claim reveals no error of law and stands.


Signed                              Date 26 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



