
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13287/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 7 March 2018                     |On 9 March 2018                        |
|                                    |                                       |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     IAM
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms M Butler, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors LLP
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart promulgated  22.11.17,  dismissing  on  all
    grounds her appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    dated 18.11.16, to refuse her protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    29.12.17.

 3. Thus, the matter came before me on 7.3.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision should be set aside.

 5. In summary, Judge Bart-Stewart had regard to the findings made  in  the
    previous appeal decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.  The  judge
    found that the appellant's  account  was  not  credible  and  that  the
    claimed newspaper articles were not reliable. The judge did not  accept
    that the appellant's family had left Libya or that the appellant  would
    be at risk from any militia in Libya.

 6. In essence, the grounds argue that the judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    erred in dismissing the  appeal  by  failing  to  have  regard  to  the
    evidence of the  supporting  documents  including  newspaper  articles;
    failed to consider humanitarian protection on the basis of the  country
    guidance; and failed to have regard to the expert evidence relating  to
    the Qaaqah milita. It is further complained  that  article  8  was  not
    considered.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Parkes considered that applying
    Devaseelan principles, the judge was entitled to take a sceptical  view
    of the appellant's credibility and the documentation produced. However,
    it was arguable that even with the rejection  of  the  claim  that  the
    family was no longer  in  Libya  the  country  guidance  had  not  been
    followed, and article 8 was not considered. Judge  Parkes  doubted  the
    extent to which these issues would assist the appellant, but found that
    as the points were arguable permission should be granted.

 8. Events have moved on since the making of the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal. Following the decision in ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017]
    263 (IAC), it has  been  accepted  that  the  situation  in  Libya  has
    deteriorated so that article  15(c)  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence
    applies. For that reason, the Rule 24 response, dated 24.1.18, does not
    oppose the appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds.  However,  as
    confirmed by Mr McVeety, the Secretary of State continues to resist the
    appeal on Convention grounds.

 9. Ms Butler  confirmed  that  despite  the  fact  that  the  humanitarian
    protection claim is no longer resisted by the Secretary  of  State  and
    thus the appeal falls to be allowed  on  that  ground,  the  Convention
    claim is pursued.

10. In discussion with the two representatives at the hearing before me, it
    was agreed that whilst the article 8 claim was not addressed, there  is
    no purpose in doing so within this hearing as it stood or fell with the
    humanitarian protection claim and would in any event provide  a  lesser
    degree   of   protection   that   humanitarian   protection.   In   the
    circumstances, it was not necessary to address that issue.

11. I heard submissions on the Convention claim  only,  following  which  I
    reserved my decision and reasons, which I now give.

12. For the reasons set out below, I find that there was no material  error
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal sufficient to set aside  the
    decision on the Convention claim.

13. As the judge noted at [38], the  entirety  of  the  (Convention)  claim
    rested on the credibility of the appellant's account of being a  critic
    of the previous Gaddafi regime and the militia  who  have  subsequently
    taken control, by writing articles published in newspapers available in
    Libya. However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept  any  part
    of the appellant's factual account. As Mr McVeety noted, the  appellant
    has not challenged the findings between [42] and [46] of the  decision.
    In effect, the judge rejected the entirety of the appellant's claim.

14. The judge was entitled to take as a starting point the earlier decision
    dismissing the appellant's asylum claim in 2015, and noted at [37] that
    in essence the matters relied on now are the same, save that she relies
    on further evidence that was not available previously.

15. The judge carefully considered the appellant's account,  which  is  set
    out in detail in  the  decision.  The  three  newspaper  articles,  the
    claimed Facebook posts, and photographs were referenced at [39] and the
    supporting witness statements at [40] and  [41].  The  judge  carefully
    considered and assessed  the  extent  of  the  difference  in  evidence
    between the previous appeal and the current  appeal.  For  example,  at
    [46] the judge gave reasons for rejecting her father's statement as not
    credible.

16. The judge went on to address and assess the newspaper articles at [47],
    which were found to be  rambling,  incoherent  and  their  purpose  and
    context unclear. For that reason, the judge reached the conclusion that
    even if these were published as claimed, they would  not  now,  some  4
    years later, place her at any risk. Emails  relating  to  the  articles
    were addressed between [48] and [51], with the judge concluding for the
    reasons set out that she could not attach any weight  to  the  articles
    the supposed originals of which were produced at the hearing, too  late
    to enable verification.

17. Complaint is made in respect of these articles,  the  emails,  and  the
    supporting witness statements, that it was wrong for the judge to  give
    no weight to  the  evidence,  a  point  which  Mr  McVeety  accepts  in
    principle. However, the judge gave cogent reasons within the  decision.
    The assessment of the articles does not end there, as at [57] the judge
    returned to that evidence and considered its reliability in the context
    of the evidence as a whole, concluding that no reliance could be placed
    on these documents. The judge also doubted their provenance.

18. Effectively, whilst better language may have  been  deployed,  such  as
    according 'little' or 'limited' weight, the reality of the situation is
    that an adequate assessment was made of the evidence, in the context of
    the whole, and that the judge concluded that the appellant  had  failed
    to  demonstrate  that  the  articles  could  be  relied  upon.  In  the
    circumstances, I find any error of law in this regard is  not  material
    to the outcome of the appeal. However it was phrased, cogent  reasoning
    was provided for dismissing the appeal. The grounds in this regard  are
    little more than a criticism of terminology. Reliance  on  form  rather
    than substance is insufficient to establish a material error of law.

19. I reject the related submission of Ms Butler that  at  [57]  the  judge
    accepted that the appellant  wrote  the  three  articles.  Reading  the
    decision as a whole, it is clear that the judge  did  not  accept  that
    proposition, but effectively stated at [57] that even if she  gave  the
    benefit of the doubt, at the highest the evidence was of three articles
    published several years ago, with no evidence that  the  appellant  had
    any profile in Libya. The judge gave  perfectly  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that the articles, which were "hardly  memorable,"  did  not
    present a risk for the appellant today.

20. Complaint is also made that the judge failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    country expert evidence as to the risk from the Qaaqah  militia.  I  am
    satisfied that the judge considered the evidence as a whole, as  stated
    within the decision. At [16] the judge referenced the  expert  evidence
    relied on of Professor Joffe and Dr Cherstich. However, this aspect  of
    the case, that there is a Qaaqah militia, that they continue and pursue
    vendetta, and that criticising a militia publically would put a  person
    at risk of being placed on a target list, had to be considered  in  the
    context of the findings  as  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    factual claim. The appellant was found not  credible  and  her  account
    rejected. In the light of those clear findings, there is no real  basis
    for the appellant being at risk on return  on  the  basis  of  articles
    which were found not to be reliable. Outside the  article  15(c)  risk,
    the expert evidence is premised on the basis that the  appellant  would
    be at risk as an activist who has criticised the militia  in  articles.
    That premise was rejected by the Tribunal,  for  cogent  reasons  clear
    discernible in the decision. In the circumstances, there is no material
    error in any omission to address the expert evidence in more detail.

21. In the light of the comprehensive findings rejecting the core basis  of
    the appellant's account of  being  a  critic  of  the  regime  and  the
    militia, there is no material error of law in the subsidiary point that
    the appellant would be at risk because  she  would  continue  to  be  a
    political activist on return to Libya and cannot be expected to curtail
    that activity or supress her opinions.

22. In the circumstances, I find that the decision insofar as it relates to
    the Convention claim  is  sustainable  and  does  not  demonstrate  any
    material error of law. However, as stated above, following  the  change
    to the Country Guidance, the Secretary of State  now  agrees  that  the
    appeal falls to be allowed on human rights grounds.

23. The parties agreed that it was unnecessary for the Tribunal to consider
    the article 8 human rights grounds.

Conclusion & Decision

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on
                    Convention  grounds  but  allowing  it  on  humanitarian
                    protection grounds only.


                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, given the alleged risk  aspects,  I  consider
it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.  Breach  of  this
direction may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable.


                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated


