
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No: PA/13891/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 2 August 2019                     |on 13 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                      H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Sirel, of JustRight Scotland, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a Kurdish citizen of Iran, born  on
    8 July 2001.  He says that he was involved with the KDPI,  placing  him
    at risk from the Iranian authorities on political and  ethnic  grounds.
    He  also  provided  the  respondent  with  evidence   of   intellectual
    impairment from an occupational psychologist.  The respondent  accepted
    that he is Kurdish but not that he is Iranian, was  involved  with  the
    KDPI, or was of interest to the authorities.    He  was  granted  leave
    "within the rules", based on the psychologist's  report  and  his  best
    interests, for 30 months until 21 March 2021.  He appealed to  the  FtT
    against refusal of his asylum claim.  The FtT found that he is Iranian,
    but that his claim was not credible, and he was not at risk on  return.
    He now appeals to the UT.

 2. This determination is to be read with the full  details  of  the  above
    contained in:

      i) The respondent's decision and reasons dated 17 September 2018.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Mackenzie, promulgated on 25 March 2019.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed with the UT  on  13  May
         2019:  A,  "Vulnerability,  expert  medical  evidence  and  witness
         evidence";  B,  "Credibility,  consideration  of   expert   country
         evidence"; and C, "Country guidance".

      v) The grant of permission by the UT, dated 18 June 2019.

     vi) The respondent's response under rule 24, dated 28 June 2019.

    vii) The appellant's reply, dated 19 July 2019.

 3. Mr Sirel relied on the submissions made to  the  FtT,  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the UT, and the reply.  He asked the UT to find (i) that  the
    appellant was  a  vulnerable  witness,  (ii)  that  his  case  met  the
    requirements of country guidance, so as to qualify for protection,  and
    (iii) that the appeal to the UT should be allowed, and the decision  of
    the FtT reversed, or alternatively remitted to the  FtT.   The  further
    points which I  noted  from  his  submissions,  largely  following  the
    grounds, were these:

    On ground A:

      i) The psychologist assessed the appellant  as  having  extremely  low
         intellectual functioning, in  the  lowest  1%  of  the  population;
         memory in the lowest 1%; and independent  living  score  less  than
         0.1%.

     ii) The judge at [15, 16, 31 & 41] noted and accepted  those  findings.
         They were also accepted by the respondent, and therefore  the  oral
         examination of the psychologist, who had attended, was limited.

    iii) The judge took account of a  letter  from  a  social  worker  (p.83
         appellant's FtT bundle) but it was dated 9 May 2018, prior  to  the
         psychologist's report, which was dated 7 August 2018.  At [42]  the
         judge focused on the letter and at [44] rejected the submission for
         the appellant on the level of his ability to  function.   That  ran
         counter to the report.  It  gave  disproportionate  weight  to  the
         letter.  It should have been given no weight.  The judge was  bound
         to accept the conclusion in the report.  She reached an  irrational
         conclusion.

     iv) Unfairness resulted from  the  psychologist's  evidence  not  being
         taken orally in full.

    Taking ground C next:

      v) Even if the appellant's account of events in Iran was rejected, his
         identity as an Iranian Kurd, and the vulnerability  established  by
         the psychologist's report, showed that he was liable  to  be  taken
         advantage of, and so at risk from the authorities, applying country
         guidance.

    On ground B:

     vi) The judge gave no reason at [35] for finding the explanation in the
         expert report about payment for leaflets not credible and no reason
         at [37] for finding the report not to advance the appellant's case.

 4. Mr Govan relied upon the rule  24  response,  and  submitted  that  the
    grounds amounted only to disagreement.  I noted these points:

      i) Irrationality was a high target.  There was  a  range  of  evidence
         about the level of the appellant's disability, which the judge  had
         to resolve.

     ii) It was particularly difficult to reconcile the assessment that  the
         appellant was in the bottom 0.01% for independent living  with  his
         own account at interview and  elsewhere  in  his  evidence  of  his
         activities, including departure from Iran and travel to the UK.

    iii) The  judge  considered  all  the  evidence  about  the  appellant's
         functioning, and  treated  him  as  a  vulnerable  witness,  making
         multiple references to his difficulties.

     iv)  The  findings  on  the  appellant's  account   were   largely   on
         implausibility, not on inconsistencies which might derive from  his
         intellectual problems.

      v) The psychologist did not suggest that the  appellant  would  be  in
         difficulty giving a  truthful  account  of  himself,  or  answering
         straightforward questions.

     vi)  Nothing  in  the  country  guidance  suggested  that  intellectual
         impairment, and being Kurdish,  presented  a  risk,  if  there  was
         nothing more to give rise to suspicion, such as a link  to  illegal
         political parties.

    vii)  There  was  no  procedural  unfairness  in  the  brevity  of   the
         examination of the psychologist.

   viii) Ground A was well short of showing irrationality.

     ix) The country expert report was almost entirely recital of background
         evidence.  It said very  little  about  the  circumstances  of  the
         appellant.  What it did  say  was  at  [88]  and  [90],  two  short
         passages in a lengthy document,  and  essentially  speculative,  an
         observation properly open  to  the  judge  at  [35].   The  judge's
         comment at [37] had to be read in that context.

      x) The decision of the FtT should stand.

 5. I indicated in course  of  submissions  that  the  hint  at  procedural
    unfairness in ground A disclosed no error, and that ground C failed  to
    show anything in the country guidance to support the appellant,  absent
    favourable credibility findings. Beyond that, I reserved my decision.

 6. The appellant was treated  throughout  as  a  vulnerable  witness;  his
    difficulties are to  the  fore  of  the  judge's  assessment;  and  she
    accepted that his functioning is impaired, and he receives a high level
    of support.

 7. It is difficult to see where ground A might take  the  appellant.   His
    asylum case did not turn on precisely where he is to be placed  on  the
    intellectual scale.

 8. The appellant does not show that if the judge thought his  intellectual
    abilities to be even lower than she did, that might have  improved  the
    credibility of his claim.  The reverse might have been the case.

 9. The appellant does not show that anything might have been gained from a
    lengthier examination-in-chief of the psychologist.  For all  that  has
    been said, that would not have amounted to more than reading her report
    aloud, and it is plain that the judge paid thorough  attention  to  the
    report.

10. On the appellant's intellectual functioning, the evidence  presented  a
    conundrum.  It is difficult to reconcile an assessment  of  someone  as
    falling within the  bottom  0.1%  for  living  independently  with  the
    history  he  gave;  with  his  giving  evidence  without  any   obvious
    difficulty, [9 & 33]; and with showing some practical  skills,  despite
    his problems.  The judge at [44] reached an assessment well within  her
    scope, giving clear and sensible reasons.  It goes much too far to  say
    that the report obliged her to conclude otherwise.  Further, as I  have
    said, it is not shown that this was the crux of the case.  A  different
    assessment, within the available range,  would  not  have  changed  the
    outcome.

11. On ground B, at first sight the last sentence of [37], "I do  not  find
    that anything in the expert report ... alters my assessment of the core
    of the appellant's account", comes perilously close to  the  structural
    error of reaching a conclusion before looking at all the evidence,  and
    of asking only whether an expert report changes  it;  in  other  words,
    putting the cart before the horse.   However,  that  is  not  what  the
    ground aims at, but at absence of reasons.  There was substance in  the
    answer by Mr Govan, namely  that  the  report  is  almost  entirely  on
    general background, hardly at all on the appellant,  and  [35]  of  the
    decision is accurate and sensible  on  the  little  that  is  specific.
    Ground B shows no inadequacy of reasoning.

12. The appellant's two final points were that  the  psychologist's  report
    should have been taken as the last  word  on  his  level  of  cognitive
    functioning, and that amounted to a conclusive risk factor in terms  of
    country guidance.  He would need to succeed on both.  His case has been
    pressed as keenly as it could be, in the FtT and in the UT, but he  has
    not shown that the FtT's resolution of either of those issues  involved
    the making of an error of law.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is maintained.




    [pic]


    7 August 2019
    UT Judge Macleman
