
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13478/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 22 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     RS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Meikle, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1  January
    1991.  He originally came to the United Kingdom in 2007 but was removed
    back to Afghanistan on 8 December 2009.  He claims that  he  then  left
    Afghanistan in 2013 and arrived clandestinely in the UK in 2013.  On 12
    February 2015, he was apprehended and arrested by the  UK  authorities.
    On  26  February  2015,  he  claimed  asylum.   Following   the   usual
    interviews, his asylum claim was refused on 14  April  2015.   However,
    following  an  appeal,  initially  unsuccessfully  to  the   First-tier
    Tribunal but ultimately successful before the Upper Tribunal  in  April
    2016, the Secretary of State reconsidered his decision.

 3.  On  1  December  2017,  the  Secretary  of  State  again  refused  the
    appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant again appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal
    was heard on 9 April 2018 by Judge I D Boyes.

 5. Judge Boyes made an adverse credibility finding and did not accept that
    the appellant's claim to be at risk from the  Taliban  and  the  Afghan
    authorities was established.  In addition, the judge considered whether
    the appellant could relocate to Kabul.   He  rejected  the  appellant's
    claim that he would be exposed to a risk falling within  Art  15(c)  of
    the   Qualification   Directive   (Counsel    Directive    2004/83/EC).
    Consequently, Judge Boyes dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds and also under Arts 2 and 3 of  the
    ECHR.  Further, he dismissed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of  the
    ECHR concluding  that  there  were  no  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration into Afghanistan and there  was  nothing  exceptional  to
    justify the grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on a  number  of  grounds.
    First,  he  challenged  the  judge's   adverse   credibility   finding.
    Secondly, he contended that the judge had failed properly  to  consider
    the background evidence relied upon and had wrongly  failed  to  depart
    from the (then) relevant  country  guidance  decision  in  AK  (Article
    15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) which concluded that  there
    was no Art 15(c) risk in Kabul.

 7. On 15 May 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge C A Parker) granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal but only on the ground  that  the  judge
    had failed properly to consider the background evidence and had wrongly
    failed to depart from the country guidance case of AK.  Permission  was
    refused on the  ground  challenging  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding.  The appellant did not  seek  to  renew  his  application  for
    permission to the Upper Tribunal on the ground relating to the  adverse
    credibility finding.

 8. Mr Meikle, who represented the appellant,  accepted  that  the  adverse
    credibility finding stood.  Nevertheless, he maintained the ground upon
    which permission was granted, namely that the judge had failed properly
    to consider the background evidence and expert report such that he  had
    failed properly to consider whether he should depart from  the  country
    guidance case of AK and conclude, as was argued, that there was in fact
    an Art 15(c) risk in Kabul.

 9. That, of course, cannot  be  relevant  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant can  succeed  in  his  asylum  claim.   The  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding, which now  stands  unchallengeable,  is  fatal  to
    success on that basis.  However, before me, it was common  ground  that
    if the judge had erred in assessing  whether  the  appellant  would  be
    exposed to a risk of indiscriminate violence contrary to Art  15(c)  in
    Kabul, the appellant's humanitarian protection claim would need  to  be
    reconsidered, not least because  the  judge  had  made  no  finding  in
    respect of any risk falling within Art 15(c) in  the  appellant's  home
    area.

The Judge's Decision

10. Before the judge, the appellant, in effect, invited the judge to depart
    from the country guidance decision in AK relying upon an expert  report
    from Tim Foxley (at pages  15-67  of  the  appellant's  bundle)  and  a
    substantial bundle of "objective evidence" from sources such as Amnesty
    International and Human Rights Watch and news articles  (at  pages  68-
    356).  All of these documents postdated AK.  In addition, the appellant
    relied upon a French case in which the court had held that the level of
    indiscriminate violence in Kabul did reach the Art 15(c) threshold.

11. The judge first referred to the country expert's report at para  16  of
    his determination as follows:

         "16. I turn to the report by Tim Foxley MBE,  the  country  expert.
             Mr Foxley produces a very, very lengthy report which makes for
             interesting reading.  He is obviously a  man  who  enjoys  his
             topic area and subject well.  I do not say that  pejoratively.
             However, in terms of relevance to the issues which fell to  be
             decided in this case, the assistance he gives is limited."

12. The judge then, having rejected  the  appellant's  credibility  on  the
    basis of his asylum claim, returned to the issue of Art 15(c) at  paras
    30-31 where he said this:

         "30. If I  am  not  correct  in  relation  to  the  return  to  the
             appellant's  home  town  then  there  is  no  reason  why  the
             appellant cannot return to Kabul and live there.  The  Country
             Guidance, which I follow, highlights that  although  Kabul  is
             not a place where nothing happens, the risk does not meet  the
             Article 15C threshold.  Foxley, the country expert,  does  not
             assert that it does  and  the  matters  contained  within  the
             objective bundle, individually or cumulatively, do not lead me
             to the conclusion that Kabul meets the threshold of 15C.  None
             of  the  news  reports  within  the  appellant's  bundle   are
             independently verified or peer reviewed.  I place no  reliance
             upon them accordingly.

         31.  I note the appellant's reliance upon a French case in which it
             is said that the French Court found that Kabul met the Article
             15C threshold.  I pace (sic) no reliance upon this.  I  cannot
             do so as the French court is not binding upon me and I do  not
             know of what evidence was provided to the French Court."

The Submissions

13. Mr Meikle submitted that the  judge's  reasoning  in  para  30  of  his
    determination was inadequate.

14. Mr Meikle submitted that the judge had failed properly to  consider  Mr
    Foxley's report, in particular at paras 59-63.  Mr Meikle accepted that
    Mr Foxley had not expressed a conclusion as to  whether  the  level  of
    violence in Afghanistan met the requirements of Art 15(c) but that,  in
    itself, was not a basis upon which his report could, in effect,  simply
    be disregarded.  Mr Meikle  submitted  that  it  was  not  the  country
    expert's role to determine whether  the  appellant's  return  to  Kabul
    would breach Art 15(c).  Mr Meikle submitted that at paras 61-63 of his
    report, Mr Foxley had set out a number of factors which  pointed  to  a
    deterioration  in  the  security  situation  in  Afghanistan,  and   in
    particular in Kabul.

15. Further, Mr Meikle submitted that the judge had failed, in  effect,  to
    give proper reasons for rejecting the background evidence  relied  upon
    before him.  In particular, he  relied  upon  a  number  of  background
    documents which he listed at para 18 of his skeleton argument which all
    postdated AK (and with one exception also  postdated  the  more  recent
    country guidance case of AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]
    UKUT  00118  (IAC))  which  supported  Mr  Foxley's   analysis   of   a
    deteriorating security situation.   Also,  Mr  Meikle  submitted  that,
    whilst the news report might properly be given  less  weight  than  the
    reports from organisations such  as  Amnesty  International  and  Human
    Rights Watch, the judge had been wrong to place "no reliance upon them"
    because they were not "independently verified or peer reviewed".

16. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Howells  accepted  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the Art 15(c) claim was short.  However, he  pointed  out
    that there was no skeleton argument from the appellant's (then) Counsel
    and no guide to the essential passages in the background evidence which
    were relied upon.  It appeared from  the  Record  of  Proceedings  that
    Counsel had referred to Mr Foxley's report and the French case and  had
    submitted that the Art 15(c) threshold was reached in Kabul.

17. Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  judge  had  sufficiently,  in  these
    circumstances, dealt with the material and was  entitled  not  to  rely
    upon the French Court's decision.  He submitted that there had not been
    a "vigorous argument" about Art 15(c) and  that  the  judge's  decision
    disclosed no material error of law.

Discussion

18. At the date of the  hearing,  AK  was  the  relevant  country  guidance
    decision.  That case decided, on the evidence before the Upper Tribunal
    at that time, that no Art 15(c) risk of indiscriminate violence existed
    in Kabul.

19. In fact, on 16 April 2018, which was  three  days  before  the  judge's
    decision was promulgated, the Upper Tribunal published the new  country
    guidance case of AS.  That decision left "unaffected" the  decision  in
    AK in relation to Art 15(c).

20. Mr Meikle did not seek to argue that the judge should  have  considered
    the decision in AS which had become the relevant country guidance  case
    by the time his decision was promulgated.   Mr  Meikle's  position,  no
    doubt, reflects the fact that AS, in effect, affirmed AK in respect  of
    any Art 15(c) risk.

21. Consequently, before me, the parties' argument centred on  whether  the
    judge had properly considered whether to depart from AK.

22. The judge was bound to treat as  "authoritative"  the  decision  in  AK
    unless there were "very strong grounds supported  by  cogent  evidence"
    not considered by the Upper Tribunal in AK  for  reaching  a  different
    view (see SG (Iraq) v SSHD {2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [47]).

23. In my judgment, the judge did fail properly  to  consider  whether  the
    evidence justified a departure from AK.

24. First, Mr Foxley's report did provide some support for the  appellant's
    case that the security situation had deteriorated  in  Afghanistan,  in
    particular in Kabul.  It was no part of his role to usurp the  judicial
    function of determining whether the appellant had established a  breach
    of Art 15(c).That was not a good reason for giving it no  weight.   His
    expert report, nevertheless, spoke to a deterioration in  the  security
    situation and contained material  at  paras  59-71  which  relies  upon
    material since AK was decided that merited consideration by the  judge.



25. Secondly, there was, in the bundle, a considerable volume of background
    material,  much  of  which  originated  from  recognised  international
    organisations and official bodies that, again, spoke to a deteriorating
    security situation in Afghanistan and,  in  particular,  in  Kabul.   I
    would also add that with the exception of the US  Department  of  State
    Report dated 3  March  2017  (at  pages  78-112),  this  material  also
    postdates AS.  The judge was required to grapple with this evidence and
    provide adequate reasons why this evidence did not justify a  departure
    from AK.

26. Whilst, as Mr Howells in effect submitted, one can have  sympathy  with
    the judge if he was not directed to the relevant material, nevertheless
    his obligation to apply "anxious scrutiny"  to  the  appellant's  claim
    required him to engage with the relevant material.  To assist the judge
    in those circumstances, it should be common practice for an appellant's
    representative to highlight the relevant material and passages  in  the
    material upon which reliance is placed.  It is simply not acceptable to
    present a significant bundle of documents, which  may  run  to  several
    hundred pages, and legitimately expect a judge to plough through it  to
    see whether there is any relevant material to support  the  appellant's
    claim.

27. Here, the judge says that he has considered the material in the bundle.
     However, his conclusion that it did not "individually or cumulatively"
    lead him to find  that  "Kabul  meets  the  threshold  of  15C"  was  a
    conclusion and not a reasoned rejection of the material's claim import.
     The judge's error is that neither the parties  nor  this  Tribunal  is
    able to understand the basis upon which the judge  concluded  that  the
    background evidence did not justify a departure from AK (see Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC)).

28. That, in itself, is sufficient in my judgment, to  establish  that  the
    judge's adverse finding in respect of Art 15(c) was flawed  and  cannot
    stand.

29. I would add this in relation  to  Mr  Meikle's  other  points.   First,
    whilst the judge was entitled to give news reports  (because  of  their
    very  nature)  less  weight  than  reports  produced  by  international
    organisations and the such like, the fact that they  had  not,  in  his
    words, been  "independently  verified  or  peer  reviewed"  was  not  a
    justification for giving them no weight and placing "no reliance"  upon
    them.  Secondly, in relation to the decision of the  French  Court,  in
    the absence of a clear understanding as to the  evidential  basis  upon
    which the French Court reached its conclusion, I see nothing  wrong  in
    the judge's approach in para 31 of his determination in respect of that
    decision.

30. Having set aside the judge's adverse finding in respect of Art 15(c), a
    fresh decision must be made in respect of the appellant's  humanitarian
    protection claim.  That claim will  require  findings  to  be  made  in
    respect of the risk of indiscriminate violence to the appellant in  his
    home area and in Kabul.  The appellant will, of course, have to contend
    with the conclusion of the Upper Tribunal in AS.   That  decision  was,
    however, based on material available to the Upper Tribunal  up  to  the
    end of 2017.  The judge will have to consider whether  to  depart  from
    the Upper Tribunal's conclusion that the decision in AK  is  unaffected
    on the basis of the expert evidence relied upon by  the  appellant  and
    the more recent material in 2018 including that which Mr Meikle  relied
    upon before me and which  he  set  out  in  para  18  of  his  skeleton
    argument.

31. The judge's adverse credibility finding and, therefore, his decision to
    dismiss the appellant's claim on asylum grounds stands.

Decision

32. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  any
    related claim under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR involved the making of  an
    error of law and cannot stand.  The decision is set aside.

33. The judge's adverse credibility finding and his decision to dismiss the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds stands.

34. The judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8  was
    not challenged and stands.

35. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge I D Boyes) in order to remake  the  decision  in
    respect of the appellant's humanitarian protection  claim  and  related
    claims under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            14 November 2018


