
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/13523/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 February 2018                        |On 29 March 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  miss l g
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss G in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant  is  referred  to  as  "the  Secretary  of  State".   The
    Respondent is referred to as "the Claimant".

2.   The Claimant, a national of Albania, date of  birth  31  January  1994,
    appealed against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 22 November
    2016.  Her appeal against the Secretary of State's decision came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Asjad who, on 20 September 2017, allowed  her
    appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds and made an  anonymity  order
    which is continued.

3.   The decision was challenged by  grounds  raised  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and permission to appeal was given by  Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Manuell who stated as follows:-

         "1.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Asjad  allowed  the  Appellant's
             protection appeal in a decision and reasons promulgated on  20
             September 2017.  The Appellant is Albanian.  She  claimed  she
             was at risk on return from her family and from society.


         2.   The Respondent's (Secretary of State) onwards grounds dated 26
             September 2017 were in time.  They assert in summary that  the
             judge  misapplied  country  guidance  and   failed   to   give
             sufficient reasons for her findings.


         3.   The grounds have merit and identify arguably  material  errors
             of law.  The consideration of the current  country  background
             material appears superficial and country guidance has arguably
             been misunderstood."

4.   Miss Isherwood fairly relies on the two grounds that had  been  raised:
    First, the Judge made  errors  in  seeking  to  equate  the  Claimant's
    circumstances to that of being a trafficked woman when the reality  was
    that the evidence showed she had been the victim of  domestic  violence
    within Albania; and secondly, the Judge failed to identify how the risk
    from the Claimant's family was properly  addressed  by  way  of  either
    internal  relocation  or  sufficiency  of  protection  in   the   sense
    contemplated by the case of Horvath.

5.   The Claimant at the appeal was unrepresented but she  essentially  said
    (and repeated) her fears on return from her family  from  her  brothers
    who have murderous intent towards her and her child, and  the  lack  of
    any support from her family  were  she  to  return.   It  is  extremely
    unfortunate that the Claimant, having attended the hearing  and  called
    evidence from two witnesses who it would seem the Judge accepted  their
    evidence.  Although the findings are somewhat inadequate, it  seems  to
    have accepted, although there is a lack of  clarity  in  any  reasoning
    given that the Claimant was a credible witness of fact.  Assuming  that
    was  a  conclusion  the  Judge  could  reasonably  have   arrived   at,
    unfortunately the analysis of the risks posed to the Claimant including
    the question of whether internal relocation was an option or there  was
    sufficiency of protection to which the Claimant  could  have  recourse,
    issues raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter, simply have  not  been
    properly addressed by the Judge, either at all or sufficiently.

6.   In addition, the Judge had before her cited extensively in the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter the Secretary of State's case which  addresses  risk
    on return and a sufficiency  of  protection,  and  unfortunately  those
    matters simply have not been tackled as is reasonable to expect.

7.   It may well be the outcome was as a  fact  the  right  one,  but  quite
    simply absent of proper reasoning  and  sufficient  reasoning,  I  find
    there is a material error of law and the Original  Tribunal's  decision
    cannot stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

8.   The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter  must  be  returned
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined in accordance with the law.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the Secretary  of  State.    Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
