
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13044/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2019                   |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    R M F
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Garrett, instructed by Hazelhurst Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He appealed to  a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  13
    November 2017 refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The judge dismissed his appeal on all grounds.  She found that  he  had
    not demonstrated any real risk of persecution.  She adopted the earlier
    adverse credibility findings of the judge who heard an  earlier  appeal
    of the appellant in 2009.  She thus found that the  appellant  had  not
    had any profile and was not specifically targeted by  insurgents.   She
    did not accept his account in respect of his family and  where  he  and
    they had lived and to where they moved in respect of Kirkuk and  Raniya
    in the KRG.  She concluded that, in light of evidence subsequent to the
    country guidance which is annexed to the Court of Appeal's decision  in
    AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ  944,  country  conditions  had  changed  and
    Kirkuk was no longer a contested area  and  Article  15(c)  risk  as  a
    consequence did not arise.  She also dismissed the appeal in respect of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

3.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the judge had failed to take account of the  country  guidance  in
    AAH [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC), which was handed down after the hearing by
    the judge but before her decision and reasons were promulgated.  It was
    argued that in  light  of  that  guidance  the  judge's  findings  were
    inconsistent.  It was also argued that the judge had erred  in  finding
    that Kirkuk was a place in which Article 15(c) risk no  longer  applied
    as this was contrary to extant country guidance, and it was clear  that
    country guidance determinations  were  to  be  taken  into  account  by
    Tribunal Judges unless there were  very  strong  grounds  supported  by
    cogent evidence to justify them not doing so.  It was also argued  that
    the judge had erred in respect of the Article 8  issue  in  not  taking
    into account delay by the Secretary of State in making the decision  to
    refuse the claim.

4.   At the hearing  Mr  Howells  conceded  that  the  judge  had  erred  as
    contended in the grounds with regard to risk in Kirkuk.  The  reasoning
    in this regard was very limited, and the judge  had  not  detailed  the
    evidence and the basis for departing from the country guidance in AA.

5.   With regard to the guidance in AAH, it was relevant  if  the  appellant
    could not return to Kirkuk.  As regards the ground concerning Article 8
    and delay by the Home Office it was argued that the delay had not  been
    raised in the skeleton arguments in January and May 2018.  It might  be
    best for the matter to be stayed behind the country guidance case to be
    heard later this year concerning the contested areas.

6.   Mr Garrett on instructions preferred that the matter not be  held  back
    as there was no benefit or reason for so doing.  If the appellant  were
    unsuccessful then he could  consider  his  position  in  light  of  the
    country guidance.

7.   Mr Howells said the point was not pressed on behalf  of  the  Secretary
    of State though it might be beneficial to await the country guidance on
    the point.

8.   I concluded that there were errors of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.
    She erred with regard to the country guidance matter in not identifying
    very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to  justify  departing
    from the country guidance in AA.  In addition she erred with regard  to
    a failure to take into account the guidance in AAH  in  coming  to  her
    decision with regard to the documentation issue.  In the  circumstances
    I consider that given that the above matters need  to  be  reconsidered
    there will need to be a reconsideration of the Article  8  issue  also.
    The credibility findings are preserved  but  otherwise  the  matter  is
    remitted for rehearing by a judge other than Judge Baker at Newport  on
    the matters identified above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 28 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
