


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/13107/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 21st September 2018                 |On 25th September 2018    |
|Prepared on 21 September 2018          |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    J. K.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of the DRC, entered the United  Kingdom
           lawfully on 12 September 1998 as a student.  He  did  not  claim
           asylum until 7 June 2017, when he relied upon his ethnicity as a
           member of the majority Bakongo, and, the fact that his  siblings
           had been granted refugee  status  in  the  UK  and  France.  The
           Respondent refused that claim on 28 November 2017.
        2. An appeal against this decision to refuse a protection claim was
           heard and dismissed by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cope  in  a
           Decision promulgated on 20 April 2018. In  the  course  of  that
           decision the Judge concluded that the Appellant had not told him
           the truth. He rejected the claim  that  an  individual  who  was
           perceived to be a member of the Bakongo was at risk in  the  DRC
           on that basis alone. He noted that the Appellant had never  been
           politically active, and had no desire to  become  so.  He  noted
           that none of the Appellant's siblings had offered  any  evidence
           in  support  of  his  claim,  and  he  rejected  as  untrue  the
           Appellant's denial of knowledge of the basis upon which they had
           successfully claimed asylum.
        3. Permission to appeal was granted against the decision  of  Judge
           Cope by First Tier Tribunal Judge  Boyes  on  15  June  2018  on
           grounds that the Appellant accepts were professionally  drafted,
           although no firm was by then on the Tribunal  record  as  acting
           for him.
        4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.
        5. Thus the matter came before me.


      The hearing
        6. When the appeal was called on for hearing the Appellant accepted
           that he had not drafted  the  grounds  of  the  application  for
           permission to appeal, and  that  he  did  not  understand  their
           content. He was content to  rely  upon  them,  and  not  to  say
           anything in addition, although he drew to my attention  that  he
           had now lived in the UK for more than 20 years.
        7.  The  Respondent's  stance  was  that  despite  the   grant   of
           permission, the grounds disclosed no material error of law.


      The grounds
        8. The grounds make no complaint over the Judge's dismissal of  the
           Article 8 appeal. That was a decision that was plainly  open  to
           him on the evidence, and it was adequately reasoned. Accordingly
           it is not open to me to entertain any challenge to it,  even  if
           with the passage of time the Appellant has now accrued 20  years
           life in the UK (albeit the vast  majority  unlawfully).  If  the
           Appellant considers that this milestone means that he  is  in  a
           position to make another application for leave to remain then it
           is open to him to do so.
        9. The first ground complains that the Judge erred in his  approach
           to the indisputably significant period of time spent in the  UK,
           and the number of applications made  by  the  Appellant  to  the
           Respondent seeking a grant of leave to remain,  before  he  made
           any claim to asylum. The Judge characterised that  behaviour  as
           delay, and in my judgement he was right to  do  so;  indeed  the
           grounds do not suggest otherwise. Instead the  grounds  complain
           that the Judge could only lawfully consider delay in the context
           of paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules, rather  than  s8  of
           the 2004 Act, relying  upon  the  Respondent's  own  API  v9  of
           January 2015 "Assessing Credibility".
       10. The short answer to this  is  that  it  is  a  complaint  of  no
           substance whatsoever. Paragraph 339L(iv) refers to the  need  to
           make a claim at the earliest possible time, unless a good reason
           can be  demonstrated  for  not  doing  so,  in  the  context  of
           considering whether  corroboration  should  be  expected  of  an
           applicant. As the Judge pointed out there was no good reason  at
           all for this  delay,  if  the  Appellant's  account  were  true.
           Moreover, there was no reason that could be identified as to why
           the Appellant's siblings would not corroborate his  account,  if
           it were true - if they had indeed  acquired  refugee  status  in
           France and the UK in reliance  upon  a  similar  basis  to  that
           advanced by the Appellant. Thus the adverse credibility findings
           that were made were well open to the Judge on the evidence,  for
           the reasons that he gave.
       11. The second ground complains that the Judge erred in his approach
           to whether the Appellant had an objectively  well  founded,  and
           subjectively genuine fear of persecution. There is no  substance
           to this complaint either. The Judge  rejected,  giving  adequate
           reasons for doing so, the  claim  that  the  Appellant  had  any
           genuine fear of harm in the DRC for the reasons given. The Judge
           went on to note that there was also no objective basis  for  the
           fear of harm that he had relied upon. Those findings  were  also
           well open to him on the evidence, and were adequately reasoned.
       12. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 20
   April 2018 contained no error of law in the dismissal of the Appellant's
   appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and remade,  and  it
   is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 21 September 2018

