
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13300/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th January 2020                   |On 5th February 2020              |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     MJ
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lee, instructed by Garth Coates Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Rushforth, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  MJ.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




         1. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  J  F  W  Phillips  set  aside  the
            decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey for reasons set out
            in a determination promulgated on 9th August  2019.  The  judge
            preserved the finding that the appellant was at  real  risk  of
            being persecuted for a Convention reason  in  Baghdad  and  its
            environs.


         2. The only issue before me was whether the appellant could,  with
            her husband and young child, internally relocate to  Basra  and
            Article 8.

         3. Ms Rushforth conceded that in the light of the country guidance
            decision of SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c);  identity  documents)
            Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC), the respondent  accepted  that
            in order to relocate to Basra  the  appellant  and  her  family
            would require a  sponsor,  which  was  not,  on  the  evidence,
            available. She accepted that for this reason the appeal  should
            be allowed.

         4. Mr Lee submitted that there were  other  reasons  why  internal
            relocation was not a realistic option but, given the respondent
            had conceded the appeal, he did not consider  it  necessary  to
            advance them before me. I agreed.

         5. In conclusion, I am satisfied the appellant is  a  refugee  and
            her appeal against the decision of the respondent refusing  her
            international protection is allowed.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and  remade  and
allowed.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



                                    Date 3rd February 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
