
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14156/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 3 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MRYAN [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Pickering, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 1 July 1964 and is a female citizen
    of Iraq. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision
    of the respondent dated 6  December  2018  refusing  her  international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on  20
    March 2019, allowed  her  appeal.  The  respondent  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There is one ground of appeal. The Secretary of State submits that  the
    judge erred in law by following country guidance (AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA
    Civ 944 and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) CG UKUT 212 (IAC)).
    The Secretary of State argues that Kirkuk, the appellant's  home  area,
    is now safe.

 3. The judge considered the question of the departing  from  the  existing
    country guidance [56-58]. He took into account the expert  evidence  of
    Dr Fatah and the most recent Home  Office  Policy  Note  (at  paragraph
    6.3.15). He concluded security situation  in  Kirkuk  had  not  changed
    significantly or durably since the assessment of risk  carried  out  by
    the Upper Tribunal in AAH. I find  the  grounds  are  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with that carefully considered and reasoned  judgement  by
    the First-tier Tribunal. The judge was not only entitled to follow  the
    country guidance; he was only required to depart from it  if  he  found
    that there was cogent evidence of a durable change in circumstances  in
    the appellant's home area of Iraq. He found  that  there  was  no  such
    evidence and I am satisfied that he considered all relevant material in
    reaching that judgement.  In  the  circumstances,  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

     The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 26 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






