
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/14117/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 April 2018                          |  On 27 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     m j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, has permission to  appeal  against
    the decision of Judge Swaniker of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on
    16 October 2017 dismissing his appeal against the decision made by  the
    respondent on 12 December 2016 refusing  his  international  protection
    claim.

2.   The judge accepted (1) that the appellant was gay;  and  (2)  that  the
    background  country  materials  indicated  that  there  was  widespread
    homophobia, hostility and violence  directed  against  LGBT  people  in
    Jamaica.  However, she decided against the appellant's  appeal  because
    she considered him someone who was:

     "naturally inclined to conduct his  life  in  a  private  and  discrete
         [sic] way and that he  would  reasonably  likely  wish  to  live  a
         discrete gay life in Jamaica as his  natural  inclination  and  not
         because of the homophobic society and system there".

3.   The grounds of appeal contend that the judge has (1) misinterpreted  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31; (2)  not  taken  into  account  the  appellant's
    evidence; (3) acted in  a  procedurally  unfair  way  by  allowing  the
    respondent to pursue the "concealment for own  reasons"  point  at  the
    hearing; and (4) failed to take account of the appellant's submissions.

4.   I received very succinct and targeted submissions from Mr Briddock  and
    Miss Fijiwala.

5.   It is convenient if I first of  all  address  the  third  ground  which
    contends that the judge fell into procedural error.  It relies  on  the
    fact that the judge dismissed the appeal solely on what  I  shall  call
    the 'voluntary concealment' point, whereas this point was  not  one  on
    which the respondent relied in her reasons  for  refusal  letter.   The
    judge  said  at  paragraph  27   that   "the   post-decision   evidence
    irresistibly raised this as a live issue in the proceedings"  and  went
    on to state that there was no procedural unfairness involved since:

     "the appellant was given the opportunity to address this matter in  his
         evidence before me when asked related questions,  as  well  as  his
         Counsel having the  opportunity  to  respond  to  the  respondent's
         arguments in this regard in his closing arguments".

     I see no force in this submission.  The respondent's  refusal  decision
    did not accept that the appellant was gay and as a result did  not  see
    it as necessary to go on to deal with the further questions set out  by
    the SC in HJ (Iran).  The appellant  and  those  instructing  him  were
    submitting to the judge that he was gay and  that  if  he  returned  to
    Jamaica he would live discreetly.  They cannot have been unaware of the
    fact that if that was accepted the appellant would also have to address
    the further  questions  set  out  in  HJ  (Iran)  including  "what  the
    individual appellant would do if he were returned to  [his  country  of
    origin] and the question:

     "If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so".

6.   In light of the guidance set out in HJ  (Iran)  it  would  indeed  have
    been remiss of the judge if he  had  not  ensured  that  the  appellant
    addressed how he would behave on return to Jamaica and what his reasons
    were.

7.   Turning to the first ground (save in one respect, best dealt with  when
    addressing grounds 2  and  4),  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  judge
    "misinterpreted" HJ (Iran).  The two key questions set out in HJ (Iran)
    pertinent to the appellant's case were set out by Lord Rodger  at  [82]
    as follows:

         "If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.


         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."

8.   I consider that the judge did indeed identify these  as  the  pertinent
    questions.  The judge's statement at paragraph 27 that in her view  the
    appellant "would reasonably likely wish to live a discrete gay life  in
    Jamaica as his natural inclination ..." adopts wording very similar  to
    that set out at [82] of HJ (Iran).

9.   However, I accept that the appellant's second  and  fourth  grounds  do
    disclose a material error of law and (as already presaged)  it  is  one
    that involves a misunderstanding (or misapplication) of  HJ  (Iran)  in
    one respect.

10.  Before identifying the judge's error(s)), it is salient  to  note  that
    the judge made  a  positive  credibility  finding  in  respect  of  the
    appellant in unqualified terms.  At paragraph 21 the judge stated:

     "I would state from the outset that I found the  appellant  an  overall
         straightforward witness.  I consider his  evidence  before  me  was
         simple and unhesitating.  He  presented  before  me  as  a  quietly
         spoken  man  not  given  to  exaggeration  and/or  hyperbole.   The
         respondent raised  a  number  of  concerns  about  the  appellant's
         description of his discovery of his sexuality and  his  account  of
         how and when he came to realise his sexual orientation.  I  do  not
         accept the respondent's assessment in this regard to be correct.  I
         consider that the appellant was able to give a credible account  of
         his background circumstances and his journey towards realising  his
         homosexuality.  It is unclear to me what else he  was  supposed  to
         have said and/or how else he was supposed  to  have  described  his
         feelings other than as he described them.  There is no template  of
         the manner and/or terms by or under which an individual is expected
         to describe such matters, and I find that the appellant was able to
         give a plausible account regarding the realisation and  development
         of his sexuality."

     In this passage the judge found the appellant credible in  the  account
    he gave of "his background  circumstances"  and  the  "realisation  and
    development of his sexuality".

11.  The errors I identify are as follows.  First of all, the judge  nowhere
    appears to have taken account of the appellant's written evidence about
    the reasons why he would behave discreetly on return  to  Jamaica.   In
    paragraph 37 of his screening interview he had  stated  that  "I  would
    have wanted to be open about my [gay] relationship with R but there  is
    just no way for that in Jamaica.  I knew there was no point putting  my
    life on the line in order to change the situation".  At paragraphs  57-
    64, under a  section  headed  "My  fear  of  return  to  Jamaica",  the
    appellant stated, inter alia, that "couldn't  however  live  openly  in
    Jamaica and if I was returned there I would live in  constant  fear  of
    being found out".  At his second asylum interview he was asked  at  Q65
    why he did not talk to people  about  his  sexuality  in  Jamaica.   He
    replied "Because like being gay is something that if you  tell  people,
    they would definitely reject me or beat me up".  At Q108 he  was  asked
    why he feared family and community in Jamaica.   He  replied  "If  they
    ever find out about my sexuality it would be dangerous".  In answer  to
    Q110 ("What would happen?") he said "I would be beaten and killed".  At
    paragraph 10 of his witness statement he stated that "In Jamaica I  had
    to worry about losing my life for being gay".

12.  Second, despite stating that the appellant was given an opportunity  to
    address the matter of how he would behave in Jamaica and why, it is not
    clear from his own record of the cross-examination questions  that  the
    appellant was asked anything about  why  he  would  behave  discreetly.
    Third, despite for the most part addressing the  HJ  (Iran)  questions,
    there is no indication that the judge understood that they required him
    to ascertain whether the appellant would  live  discreetly  in  Jamaica
    "simply because" or "for reasons that have nothing to do with any  fear
    of persecution"  (to  use  Lord  Rodger's  phraseology).   The  judge's
    reasoning appears directed only to the  question  of  whether  fear  of
    persecution was the  material  reason,  rather  than  (as  required)  a
    material reason.  The vital issue of causation was lost in her analysis
    of the hypothetical issue (not confined  as  it  should  have  been  to
    exploring how he would behave on return to Jamaica) of whether he would
    be open about his sexuality in Jamaica "if there were not problems  for
    the LGBT [community] there".

13.  Mr Briddock made a number of other submissions criticising the  judge's
    reliance on the appellant's conduct in the UK as a litmus test  of  how
    the appellant behaves/would behave "naturally".  I consider these  have
    considerable force but  I  have  already  found  the  judge's  decision
    vitiated by legal error for other reasons.

14.  I turn to consider whether I am in a position to re-make  the  decision
    without further ado.  Both parties agreed the case should be re-made in
    the Upper Tribunal, Mr Briddock  urging  me  to  decide  it  without  a
    further hearing, Miss Fijiwala asking that  I  fix  it  for  a  further
    hearing.

15.  I have decided there is  no  need  for  an  adjournment  or  a  further
    hearing.  Miss Fijiwala agreed with me that it  is  very  difficult  to
    read paragraph 21 of the FtT judge's decision as  anything  other  than
    unqualified positive credibility  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    account of his experiences.  She did not make any  submissions  against
    the appellant's credibility.  Nor did she make  any  criticism  of  the
    judge's finding that persons who would be identified  or  perceived  as
    gay in Jamaica would face persecutory harm for a Convention reason.  In
    such circumstances, I consider that these two sets of factual  findings
    are to be preserved.  All that it is necessary for me to do, therefore,
    is consider how to evaluate those findings of fact.

16.  Miss Fijiwala does not  dispute  that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    succeed in his appeal if at least  one  of  the  material  reasons  for
    behaving discreetly on return to Jamaica would be fear of  persecution.



17.  In my judgement there are two aspects to my evaluation of  this  issue:
    the subjective  and  objective.   As  regards  the  subjective,  it  is
    entirely clear from the appellant's own evidence that  whether  or  not
    his reasons for behaving discreetly on return to Jamaica  included  the
    fact that he was naturally a private  person,  one  of  his  subjective
    reasons was his fear of persecution. That is evident from the  passages
    I have quoted earlier from his screening and asylum interviews and  his
    witness statement.

18.   The  only  issue  remaining  is  whether  the  appellant  subjectively
    expressed fear of persecution upon return  to  Jamaica  is  objectively
    well-founded.  I am satisfied that it is, for  two  principal  reasons.
    Firstly, the appellant's own account of his past experiences bears  out
    that one of the reasons why he grew  up  wanting  to  keep  his  sexual
    identity private was awareness that he lived  in  a  deeply  homophobic
    society and that if  it  became  known  he  was  gay  he  would  suffer
    violence.  (In his witness statement the appellant said he  was  forced
    to pretend to be interested in girls when he was a teenager and to make
    excuses including pretending to have a girlfriend (paragraph 25)).   At
    paragraph 18 he stated that "I couldn't tell people in Jamaica  that  I
    was gay because I knew  that  I  would  be  attacked  or  killed.   The
    pressure and the way I have internalised the stigma about being gay  is
    still  with  me  today".   Secondly,  whilst  the  development  of  the
    appellant's sexual identity in the UK has not led him to "come out"  or
    participate in LGBT activities, the evidence indicates that he has come
    to the position where he feels able to identify himself as gay to  some
    persons other than his gay partners  (J  and  K).   From  the  evidence
    before the judge he had revealed his sexuality to a friend, Brother  V.
    In a recent witness statement  the  appellant  said  he  had  now  also
    revealed his sexuality to his new flatmate.  In light  of  the  judge's
    positive credibility findings I am also prepared to accept as  credible
    the appellant's own evidence that, absent any concerns  about  societal
    repercussions, he would like to reveal his sexuality  at  least  within
    his own friendship network, a step which would mean his  sexuality  was
    no longer a private matter.

19.  Viewed in the round I do not think that the appellant  falls  into  the
    category of persons identified by Lord Rodger who would act  discreetly
    on return to their country of origin purely because that was how  "they
    would wish to live, or because of social pressures".

Notice of Decision

20.  For  the  above  reasons  the  decision  I  re-make  is  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 25 April 2018
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

