
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14283/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2019                      |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                mg (pakistan)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal out  of  time  from
    the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Obhi  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 1 March 2019) dismissing his appeal against  the  refusal
    of his protection and human rights claims.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal was sought on two grounds. The first was that  the
    Judge ought to have granted an adjournment to enable the  appellant  to
    gather further evidence. The second was that the  Judge  did  not  give
    adequate reasons. Judge Pedro granted permission on ground 2,  but  not
    on ground 1. His reasoning on ground  2  was  that  the  appellant  was
    unrepresented in the appeal (although he had  been  represented  before
    the First-tier Tribunal) and while the Judge had given adequate reasons
    for her decision to dismiss the appeal under the Refugee Convention, it
    was apparent that she had made no findings or decision in  relation  to
    the appellant's human rights grounds. He continued:

         "This is an arguable error of law although consideration would need
         to be given to its materiality  and  any  possible  effect  on  the
         outcome of the appeal."

Discussion

 3. There was no appearance by the appellant at the hearing  before  me  to
    decide whether a material error of law was made out. Having perused the
    file, I was satisfied that the  Upper  Tribunal  had  taken  reasonable
    steps to notify the appellant of  the  time,  date  and  place  of  the
    hearing; and that it was in the interests  of  justice  to  proceed  to
    determine the appeal in his absence.

 4. By finding that the appellant did not  qualify  for  recognition  as  a
    refugee, and that  he  had  fabricated  his  asylum  claim,  the  Judge
    implicitly found that the appellant would not face a real risk of death
    or serious harm at the hands of non-state agents on return to Pakistan,
    contrary to Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

 5. The complete rejection of the asylum claim  also  necessarily  entailed
    that the appellant did not succeed in a private life  claim  under  the
    rules. He had only been in the UK since 2009. His  family  remained  in
    Pakistan. Accordingly, there were not very significant obstacles to his
    reintegration into life and society in Pakistan, and  his  Counsel  did
    not suggest that there were  any  such  obstacles.  The  Judge  records
    Counsel for the appellant as only making closing submissions in respect
    of the protection element of his claim.

 6. With regard to a claim outside the rules, not only was such a claim not
    advanced in closing submissions, but it was bound to fail on the facts.
    The appellant had entered the UK as  a  student.  His  application  for
    leave to remain as a student made on 29 June 2011 had been refused with
    a right of appeal, but he had not exercised a right of appeal.  He  had
    remained in the UK unlawfully, and on 27 September 2017 he had come  to
    the attention of the authorities  when  he  was  arrested  for  working
    illegally. After he had been notified of his liability to removal as an
    overstayer, he had made a claim for asylum on 2 October  2018.  He  did
    not have any family ties in the  UK  which  could  render  his  removal
    disproportionate. Realistically, the only ground upon  which  he  could
    resist removal was if his protection claim was found  to  be  credible.
    The Judge gave adequate reasons for finding his protection claim to  be
    incredible.

 7. For the above reasons, the decision is not vitiated by a material error
    of law.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and so the decision  stands  and  this  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.



Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

