
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14309/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd June 2017                      |On 25th July 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                               mr Saiful Ehsan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karim, Counsel for Fountain Solicitors, Walsall
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 30th  September  1990.
    He appealed against a decision of the Respondent  dated  15th  December
    2016 refusing him asylum, humanitarian protection and on  human  rights
    grounds.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Obhi
    on 31st January 2017.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  and  the  decision
    promulgated on 10th March 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  on  10th  May  2017.   The
    permission states that although at paragraph 29  of  the  decision  the
    judge stated that the appeal is dismissed under the Refugee  Convention
    and on human rights grounds, under the heading  "Decision",  the  judge
    stated that the appeal is allowed under the  Refugee  Convention.   The
    permission states that the grounds relating to  the  substance  of  the
    decision are not arguable.  All relevant matters were dealt with by the
    judge and there was an  absence  of  any  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Appellant would face  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in
    Bangladesh on return.  The permission states that it  is  not  arguable
    that the judge has failed to give adequate  reasons  for  her  findings
    relating to the protection claim as she took into account matters  that
    supported the Appellant's account and  having  considered  those  found
    that they undermined his credibility.  The permission states that it is
    not arguable  that  the  judge's  findings  were  outside  a  range  of
    reasonable responses to the evidence.  Permission  was  therefore  only
    granted because of the discrepancy  at  paragraph  29  when  the  judge
    stated that the appeal was dismissed under the Refugee  Convention  and
    then allowed it under the same Convention.  The judge's  findings  that
    she intended to dismiss the appeal are clear but the Tribunal is unable
    to amend what appears to be a typographical error in  the  decision  by
    way of the "slip rule".  Reference is made to Rule 42 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The permission states that  the
    Tribunal can only remedy the error by granting permission,  finding  an
    error of law and remaking the decision.

 3. In the permission directions are given.  They  state  that  this  is  a
    matter that need not put the parties to the expense of an oral  hearing
    as the nature of the error seems obvious.  The matter has however  come
    before me and I will require to make a decision.  The directions go  on
    to state that subject  to  any  written  representations  made  by  the
    parties by Friday 26th May 2017, the Tribunal proposes to find that the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved an error of law and the  decision
    will be remade formally  dismissing  the  appeal.   The  Tribunal  will
    review the  matter  after  26th  May  2017  to  decide  whether  it  is
    appropriate to confirm the proposed directions.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response on the file  dated  2nd  June  2017.   This
    states that it is abundantly clear that the  judge  has  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  Based on the determination  overall
    the only possible outcome is for this  appeal  to  be  dismissed.   The
    error is a typographical error.  The response states that the  findings
    of fact should stand and the outcome corrected to show that the  appeal
    has been dismissed on all grounds.

The Hearing

 5. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the permission in this case is
    extremely restricted.  He submitted  however  that  I  should  consider
    sending the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for the case  to  be
    heard de novo.

 6. Counsel submitted that the Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction  to  correct
    any error of law in the decision.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that the directions in the  permission
    are clear.  The substance of the case is not arguable.  I was asked  to
    find that there is an error of law and have the decision set aside  and
    for the Appellant's appeal to be dismissed on the same basis.

 8. I was asked to consider paragraph 29 of the decision which states  that
    the judge dismisses the appeal under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  on
    human rights grounds.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the  judge
    has given proper reasons for these findings.  In spite of  this,  under
    the heading "Decision",  the  judge  states  that  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant is allowed under the Refugee Convention.  He  submitted  that
    this is merely a slip of the pen.  This can no longer be changed  under
    the "slip rule" by the Upper Tribunal.  I was asked to find that  there
    is no need for this appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and that the Upper  Tribunal  should  amend  the  paragraph  under  the
    heading "Decision" to state "The appeal of the Appellant  is  dismissed
    under the Refugee Convention".

 9. I have noted the terms of the decision and  find  that  the  judge  has
    given adequate reasons for dismissing the  appeals  under  the  Refugee
    Convention, on humanitarian protection  issues  and  also  on  a  human
    rights basis.  There was a lack of supporting evidence before the judge
    and permission was granted only on the first ground of application.

10. It is clear that the First-tier Judge intended to dismiss the appeal on
    all grounds. Unfortunately the decision cannot  be  amended  under  the
    "slip rule".  I have reviewed this matter.  It is now  after  26th  May
    2017 and I find that there are no relevant written  representations  by
    the parties and that there is a material error of law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

Notice of Decision

11. The First-tier Tribunal's decision, promulgated on 10th March  2017  is
    therefore set aside and the appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

12. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 24 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

