
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14047/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd May 2019                               |On 16th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                   mr C l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of China, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 4th December  2018
    to refuse his  application  for  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5th March 2019.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bibi  on
    9th April 2019.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the UK on a
    Tier 4 Student visa in April 2010.  He was encountered by  Home  Office
    officials on 20th February 2013 after a traffic accident.  On 23rd  May
    2018 he was again encountered and  detained  and  served  with  removal
    directions and on 6th June 2018 he made a claim for asylum.   His  wife
    and son, who was born in March 2017, are treated as dependants  on  his
    claim.  The Appellant's case is that he cannot return to China  because
    he fears loan sharks.  He claims that he was involved in  gambling  and
    borrowed money from loan sharks to fund some losses which he was unable
    to repay. He further claims that he has an elder child in China  and  a
    child in the UK and that he fears that he would be  persecuted  because
    he is in breach of Chinese family planning laws.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the Appellant's claim to have  been
    threatened by loan sharks was not credible.  The judge found  that  the
    Appellant is not at risk of persecution in light of the  fact  that  he
    has  two  children.   The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    established that his removal would breach his rights under the European
    Convention on Human Rights.

Grounds of appeal

 4. It is contended in the Grounds of  Appeal  that  the  judge  materially
    erred in holding that the failure to adduce  corroborative  documentary
    evidence  discredits  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant  and  it  is
    submitted that the judge applied a standard of proof higher  than  that
    applicable.  It is further contended that the judge erred at  paragraph
    26 in  holding  that  the  absence  of  witnesses  to  corroborate  his
    statement necessarily meant that the Appellant's account was not  true.
    It is further contended that  the  judge  erred  in  holding  that  the
    internal flight alternative would be available to the  Appellant  given
    that he tried relocating in the past but  the  loan  sharks  found  him
    then.  It is contended further that the judge erred in  the  assessment
    of the Appellant's private life because she failed to take  account  of
    the length of his residence in the UK.

Error of law

 5. At the hearing before me Mr L, who  represented  himself,  submitted  a
    copy consultation with his GP on 19th February 2019 and submitted  that
    he was ill on the day of the hearing and had requested  an  adjournment
    which had been refused and that he had been forced to proceed with  the
    hearing.   Although  this  issue  was  not  raised  in  the  grounds  I
    considered the document produced by the Appellant and the way in  which
    the judge considered this matter.  At paragraph 4 the judge  said  that
    the Appellant indicated that he had a headache and a cough and that  he
    had brought medication to show the Tribunal.  The judge noted that this
    was not a new condition.  The judge concluded that, in the  absence  of
    medical evidence that he was not well enough to give evidence,  it  was
    not in the interests of justice to adjourn and that she would keep  the
    Appellant's ability  to  give  evidence  under  review  throughout  the
    hearing.  The judge noted at paragraph 22 (where the oral  evidence  is
    recited)  that  the  Appellant  had  no  difficulty  understanding   or
    answering questions asked  and  that  his  medical  condition  did  not
    prevent him from fully engaging in the hearing.

 6. The record of consultation produced by the  Appellant  at  the  hearing
    before me was dated 19th February 2019, the  day  before  the  hearing.
    That record indicated that the Appellant was in receipt  of  prescribed
    medication but that he still gets  headaches,  it  notes  that  it  was
    agreed that there would be prescribed painkillers and he was advised to
    see the optician.  There is nothing in that note to indicate  that  the
    Appellant was not fit to give evidence on 20th February 2019.   I  find
    no error in the approach taken by the judge to this matter at paragraph
    4.

 7. The grounds take  issue  with  the  judge's  apparent  requirement  for
    corroborative evidence.  At the hearing before  me  Ms  Jones  accepted
    that it could appear that  the  judge  placed  undue  reliance  on  the
    requirement for  corroboration,  but  in  her  submissions  there  were
    adequate  other  findings  to  justify  the  decision  made   and   the
    corroboration referred to could have been produced in  accordance  with
    Rule 339L of the Immigration Rules.

 8. The judge referred to corroborative evidence at paragraphs 23,  24  and
    26.  The judge also gave other reasons for rejecting the credibility of
    the Appellant.  These include the fact that he only made  a  claim  for
    asylum after he was  arrested  and  had  given  a  false  name  to  the
    arresting officers.  The judge took into account that this was a number
    of years after the claimed incidents with  the  loan  sharks  occurred.
    The judge took into account that the  Appellant  had  been  in  the  UK
    without any sort of leave since 2012 and that he said in oral  evidence
    that he was perfectly aware that his  leave  had  expired.   The  judge
    considered the Appellant's responses in  his  asylum  interview  to  be
    vague and lacking in detail about the way in which he claimed  to  have
    lost his money  playing  poker.   The  judge  found  not  credible  the
    Appellant's claim that as a  poor  man  he  was  borrowing  such  large
    amounts of money and attending a casino with  three  times  his  annual
    salary in cash on one occasion.  The judge took into account that there
    had been no threats against any  other  family  members  and  that  the
    Appellant had not been traced or threatened since leaving  China.   The
    judge found it not credible that a  powerful  gang  who  were  owned  a
    significant amount of money would not pass threats to  or  through  the
    family members if they wanted to pursue the Appellant.  The judge  also
    took into account that the Appellant did not approach  the  authorities
    for protection.  In my view these are  all  adequate  reasons  for  the
    finding that the Appellant's claim was not credible.

 9. On top of those findings the judge  found  at  paragraph  23  that  the
    Appellant had not produced any  documentary  evidence  to  support  his
    claim to have sold his house, paid off some debts and that  his  friend
    had died at the hands of the loan sharks or any evidence  of  reporting
    any incidents to the police.

10. The Appellant said in his asylum interview that he had sold  his  house
    before coming to the UK.  When this was  put  to  him  at  the  hearing
    before me he said that there should be some documents in relation to  a
    house sale but that he was not sure if he could get them.  He said that
    his parents still live in their own home in China and  that  his  house
    which was separate to theirs had been sold.  In my view the  judge  was
    entitled to consider that this is evidence which could easily have been
    obtained and that it  could  have  been  produced  to  corroborate  the
    Appellant's claim under paragraph 339L of the Rules.

11. I also note the decision in TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40  paragraphs
    15 and 16:-

         "15. The task of the Immigration Judge was in the circumstances  no
             different to that of any other Judge being  asked  to  make  a
             finding or series of findings where there  was  before  him  a
             party who had been disbelieved  in  an  earlier  part  of  the
             proceedings, had provided no independent evidence  to  support
             his account  and  was  putting  forward  explanations  of  his
             failure to  call  supporting  evidence  that  did  not  appear
             sustainable.

         16.  Where evidence to support an account given by a  party  is  or
             should readily be available, a Judge is, in my  view,  plainly
             entitled to take into account  the  failure  to  provide  that
             evidence and any explanations for that failure. This may be  a
             factor of considerable weight in relation to credibility where
             there are doubts about the credibility of a  party  for  other
             reasons. ...."

12. In my view the judge has made adequate findings. Whilst it appears that
    there may have been some undue reliance on  a  requirement  to  produce
    documentary evidence, some of the  evidence  referred  to  is  evidence
    which could readily and reasonably have been obtained by the Appellant.
     When the decision is read as a whole, it is clear that the  judge  has
    given  sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting  the  credibility   of   the
    Appellant's claim and was entitled to  conclude  that  the  absence  of
    documentary evidence which could have been obtained was a factor  which
    could be weighed against the Appellant in  terms  of  his  credibility.
    For these reasons, in my view,  there  is  no  material  error  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed                              Date: 14 May 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date: 14 May 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
