
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/14372/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2017                        |On 23 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                               Zana Mujaheedi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Middleton, Kirklees Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Zana Mujaheedi, was born on  22  March  1997  and  is  a
    citizen of Iran.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  in  June  2016  and
    claimed asylum.  By a decision dated 13 December 2016, the Secretary of
    State refused the appellant asylum.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge A W Khan) which, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 28 February 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims that he cannot return to  Iran  because  he  is  a
    supporter of the KDPI and had been involved  in  activities  with  that
    party in Iran.  The judge found that the appellant's  account  was  not
    credible and he attached no weight to an arrest warrant adduced by  the
    appellant in evidence.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, the decision is challenged  on
    the basis that the judge had provided insufficient reasoning  regarding
    credibility issues.  Secondly, the appellant  asserts  that  the  judge
    failed to consider adequately documentary evidence adduced.

 4. At [12], the judge consider the appellant's detailed account and  found
    that it was incredible.  He wrote:

         [the appellant] also claimed that  he  was  transporting  food  and
         papers to the mountain areas for the KDPI.  It was on the  occasion
         of transporting  food  to  the  KDPI  in  the  mountains  that  the
         appellant claimed he was followed by E'ttelaat.  He  actually  said
         in answer to question 108 they started flashing at a  place  called
         Kona Mishk from where to the location about 25 minutes by  car  and
         then they started shooting at a vehicle.   However,  the  appellant
         managed to jump out of the car and to escape  from  the  E'ttelaat.
         Considering the appellant's version of events in being followed,  I
         find  it  unbelievable  the  security  vehicle  was  flashing   the
         appellant's vehicle to stop but the vehicle continued to  drive  on
         until it was shot at, apparently killing one of the persons in  the
         car yet the appellant himself managed to escape by running off into
         the mountains.  The appellant claimed that E'ttelaat did not follow
         him because of armed Kurdish activity in the area. ...

    The appellant complains that the judge has not given  any  reasons  for
    having found it  "unbelievable"  that  the  account  may  be  true  and
    accurate.  The challenge is problematic.  It is difficult to know  what
    else the judge could have said than he has stated in the circumstances.
     The appellant claims to have been able to escape  from  armed  Iranian
    agents who had stopped the vehicle in which he was travelling  and  who
    had killed one of the other passengers  in  the  car.   The  judge  has
    considered the account and did not believe that it could have  occurred
    as described by the appellant.  The evidence was  of  a  kind  which  a
    judicial decision maker  might  accept  as  true  but,  equally,  might
    reject; the "reason" for rejecting the evidence is,  put  simply,  that
    the judge did not believe that the appellant could  have  escaped  from
    the clutches  of  E'ttelaat  in  what  are  prima  facie  extraordinary
    circumstances.  If a witness claims to have jumped out of an  aircraft,
    fallen 10,000 feet to the ground without a parachute and  survived  one
    does not have  to  give  "reasons"  for  finding  that  account  to  be
    incredible; it is sufficient to say that one does not believe  that  it
    happened.  In the present case, the judge could have said that  he  did
    not consider it believable that the appellant would have been  able  to
    have escaped from the car which had been attacked  by  armed  E'ttelaat
    agents who had killed one of the other passengers.   Had  he  done  so,
    such a "reason" would have added nothing to the analysis  at  all.   He
    would simply have taken a longer route to stating that,  on  its  face,
    the claim was simply unbelievable.

 5. The second ground of appeal challenges the judge's  assessment  of  the
    documentary evidence.  The appellant had produced  a  letter  from  the
    KDPI headquarters in Iraqi Kurdistan.  The letter is dated  26  January
    2017, the day before the appeal hearing.  The letter was sent  via  the
    United Kingdom branch of the KDPI in London.  The judge  sets  out  the
    contents of the letter in some detail at [13].  The judge considers the
    Country Information Guidance Report which had been provided to him.  At
    [14] the judge states that "no mention is made in the letter as to what
    the appellant was doing for the party [KDPI] in Iran."  The judge  also
    found that there was "no satisfactory evidence as to how the  KDPI  was
    certain that the person asking for  the  letter  had  to  flee  due  to
    political activism."  The judge concluded that it would be,

         reasonable  to  assume  the  party  would  have  known  about   the
         appellant's activities but I found the letter to be purely  general
         in nature and I cannot regard it as reliable evidence to  show  the
         appellant is a KDPI supporter.  I find that it  is  a  self-serving
         letter which the appellant has obtained simply to  bolster  a  weak
         asylum claim.

 6. I note that the Country Information and Guidance  to  which  the  judge
    refers deals with the verification of membership of the KDP-Iran.   The
    2013 Danish Refugee Council  Danish  Immigration  Service  Fact-Finding
    Mission deals exclusively with membership of the KDP-Iran recording (as
    the judge also did) that "every member has a written  file  within  the
    headquarters which forms the basis of the description of the  situation
    of the asylum seeker in the letter of recommendation".  I observe  that
    the letter which has been obtained  by  the  appellant  uses  the  word
    "supporter" rather than member.  Without giving  any  detail  whatever,
    the letter simply  states  that  "undoubtedly  [the  appellant]  cannot
    return home and ... if he ever be deported to Iran he would  definitely
    be arrested and certainly  run  a  risk  of  being  persecuted  by  the
    repressive agents of the Islamic regime of Iran."  In my  opinion,  the
    judge was  right  to  be  sceptical  regarding  the  evidential  weight
    attaching to this letter.  Although he does not say so  in  terms,  the
    judge duly recorded the fact that the  background  material  refers  to
    "members" and not "supporters".  Indeed, it would be absurd  to  expect
    any  political  organisation  to  keep  a  file  in  respect  of  every
    individual supporter.  It seems to me that this is the point which  the
    judge is seeking to make in his analysis of the letter.   Mr  Middleton
    submitted that the appellant had  done  everything  which  the  Country
    Guidance indicated was required.   However,  the  guidance  relates  to
    members and not supporters.  Further, given that the appellant was  not
    a member but only a supporter of the KDPI the judge is right to observe
    that there was no evidence at all as to how the KDPI in Iraqi Kurdistan
    (so described) would be  able  to  say  that  the  appellant  would  be
    "definitely arrested" if  he  returned  to  Iran;  no  basis  has  been
    provided for that assertion.  The evidential weight attaching  to  this
    letter was, as the judge found, limited.

 7. The judge went on  to  consider  another  document  which  is  entitled
    "Verdict".  The appellant claimed this  was  an  arrest  warrant.   The
    judge at [17] doubted that it was.  The judge noted that  the  document
    stated  that  the  appellant  was  to  attend  a  Revolutionary   Court
    "otherwise he would be arrested and would receive a heavy  punishment."
    However, the judge noted there was "nothing further  is  said  about  a
    warrant for his arrest."  Rather,  the  document  "simply  renounces  a
    court verdict in the absence of the appellant."

 8. I am not entirely sure what point  the  judge  is  trying  to  make  by
    distinguishing between an arrest warrant and the document which he  had
    before him  which,  as  the  judge  acknowledges,  indicated  that  the
    appellant's failure to attend a revolutionary court would lead  to  his
    arrest and detention.  The grounds complain that the judge "provides no
    explanation for not accepting the document other  than  there  was  "no
    objective verification by an expert."  I agree with Mr  Middleton  that
    the judge has become unnecessarily  concerned  with  how  exactly  this
    document should be described; what matters is that, on  its  face,  the
    document indicates the appellant would be arrested and detained  should
    he return to Iran.  However, the judge was  entitled  to  consider  the
    fact that no independent expert evidence had been  produced  to  verify
    the document.   The  absence  of  such  evidence  affected  the  weight
    properly attaching to the document.  It is clear also, in  my  opinion,
    that the judge has considered the document in the context  of  all  the
    evidence which was put before him by the appellant.  I do not find that
    the judge erred in law in his assessment of this document  or  that  he
    has attached insufficient weight to it.

 9. In the light of my above  analysis,  I  conclude  that  the  judge  has
    carried out a thorough and robust assessment of the evidence.   He  has
    reached findings which were available to him.  I find that the Tribunal
    should not interfere with his conclusion that the asylum appeal  should
    be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





