
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14067/2018 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 July 2020                     |On 21st July 2020                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    D B S

                         (ANONIMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department, I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe  born  in  1979.  His
      appeal against the deportation  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge J K Thapar on 14 August 2019.

   2. The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that:

        a. the judge failed to give clear reasons at [21] for finding  that
           it would be unduly harsh for the other family members to  remain
           in the UK if the Appellant was deported;

        b. the judge failed to conduct a balancing act;

        c. there was no consideration of the support the Appellant's family
           may receive from the eldest child's school or  social  services;
           and

        d. the judge failed to give reasons why the children's mother  [PZ]
           would not be able to cope, resulting in a complete  collapse  in
           the  physical,  emotional  and  psychological  welfare  of   the
           children.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Peart, on 14 November 2019,  on the grounds that it was arguable
      the judge failed to accord great weight  to  the  public  interest  in
      deporting foreign  criminals  and  failed  to  undertake  a  genuinely
      contextual assessment of whether  deporting  the  Appellant  would  be
      unduly harsh in the circumstances. He stated: "It was incumbent on the
      judge to carry out a balancing exercise, first  considering  paragraph
      399 and s.117C set against the relevant law such as Heshim Ali  [2016]
      UKSC 60, KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and PG (Jamaica)  [2019]EWCA  Civ
      1213. All grounds are arguable."

   4. The hearing of the appeal was vacated due to the outbreak of Covid 19.
      Directions were sent to the parties on 11 May 2020 indicating that the
      error of law hearing would be conducted without a hearing, subject  to
      any view expressed by the parties, and inviting the  parties  to  make
      written submissions.

   5. A request for an oral hearing was expressed in the grounds and in  the
      Rule 24 response, but there was no  objection  to  the  error  of  law
      hearing proceeding without an oral hearing  in  response  to  specific
      directions. I have considered the submissions made  by  the  Appellant
      and the Respondent in response to directions. Given  the  restrictions
      of operating in a pandemic, I extend time to comply with directions. I
      am satisfied that, in the interests of justice,  this  appeal  can  be
      decided without a hearing.

   6. The issue before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  it  would  be
      unduly harsh for the family to remain in the UK if the  Appellant  was
      deported.  It  was  accepted  there  were   genuine   and   subsisting
      relationships between the Appellant, his wife and children and that it
      would be unduly harsh for the family to relocate to Zimbabwe.  It  was
      accepted that if the Appellant's deportation was unduly harsh  on  the
      eldest child [JZ] it would also be unduly harsh on the youngest  child
      [AZ].

   7. The judge made the following findings of fact at [13] to [17]:

        i) The Appellant is the main carer of the children, JZ and AZ,  and
           his wife, PZ, is employed full-time;

       ii) The Appellant is not  the  biological  father  or  JZ,  but  the
           Appellant has played a parental role for most of JZ's life;

      iii) JZ has been diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder [ASD];

       iv) The Appellant regularly attends school to  assist  JZ  including
           parent's meetings, school trips and accompanying JZ to and  from
           school;

        v) The Appellant attends sports classes with JZ (funded by PZ)  and
           appointments with outside professional agencies;

       vi) The Appellant is heavily involved in the lives of  his  children
           and has taken a course to better understand the needs of JZ;

      vii) JZ requires a high level of support and has a set  routine  when
           arriving at school each day. Any  changes  would  cause  him  to
           become dysregulated for the whole day;

     viii) JZ requires  adult  supervision  to  manage  his  behaviour  and
           safety;

       ix) The Appellant accompanies JZ to swimming, school and they  enjoy
           playing football;

        x) The judge relied on the comprehensive report from an independent
           social worker [ISW]  who  concluded  that,  although  additional
           support was available at school, many of JZ's needs and  demands
           would still have to be met at home;

       xi) The Appellant was a stabilising figure for JZ  and  his  removal
           would likely cause JZ's behaviour to become more extreme;

      xii) JZ's diagnosis was lifelong and its manifestations would  change
           as he got older;

     xiii) The Appellant was actively involved in the care of JZ and in the
           management of his condition.

   8. At [21] the judge found: "The Appellant's circumstances meet Exception
      2 (section 117C(5) of the NIA Act 2002 and reflected in Paragraph  399
      of the Immigration Rules.) The effect of the  Appellant's  deportation
      would be to undermine the existing emotional bonds  he  has  with  his
      wife and their children. He would be precluded from returning  to  the
      UK for at least 10 years (unless the deportation order was revoked  by
      the Respondent). They would not be able to visit him  in  Zimbabwe  in
      light of Mrs Z's immigration status.  The  family  have  a  close  and
      loving relationship.  It  is  in  the  children's  best  interests  to
      continue to be raised by both their parents, as  they  have  been  for
      most of their lives. To bring that to an end would, in my judgment, be
      unduly harsh on the children and in particular to their eldest  child.
      The Appellant is equally involved with his care and his needs are such
      that he requires significant constant support and  attention  from  at
      least one parent not only at home but at school too. This  is  a  role
      taken mainly by the Appellant. I am told that any changes  in  routine
      do adversely affect their eldest child and therefore  any  changes  in
      the status quo could be detrimental."



The Respondent's submissions

   9. The Respondent submitted that the  judge  failed  to  give  clear  and
      adequate reasons for his finding at [21]. It was submitted that  these
      are the expected circumstances  in  every  deportation  scenario.  The
      judge did not refer to any relevant authority and failed to appreciate
      the high threshold of the unduly harsh test set out in KO (Nigeria) at
      para 23:

           "On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh"  seems  clearly
           intended  to  introduce   a   higher   hurdle   than   that   of
           "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking  account  of  the
           public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. Further
           the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison.  It  assumes
           that there is a "due" level of  "harshness",  that  is  a  level
           which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant  context.
           "Unduly" implies something going beyond that level. The relevant
           context is that set by  section  117C(1),  that  is  the  public
           interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking
           for a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be
           involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent."

  10. The Respondent submitted that the judge failed to  establish  how  the
      circumstances at [21] go beyond what  would  necessarily  be  involved
      with the deportation of a parent. Although the JZ had  been  diagnosed
      ASD, this was not an uncommon condition  or  a  determinative  factor,
      without more. There may be a detrimental effect on the routine of  the
      child, but the judge failed to provide clear and adequate reasons  for
      why this would amount to unduly harsh  consequences.  The  Appellant's
      wife is involved with the care and upbringing of JZ and  has  utilised
      services  provided  by  the  NHS.  As  set  out  these  services   and
      potentially those from social services/school/other  support  agencies
      would be available in the absence of the Appellant. The  judge  failed
      to engage with or consider this crucial and material point in issue.

  11. The Respondent relied on BL (Jamaica) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  357  at  [53]
      "...The UT were entitled to work on the basis that the social services
      would  perform  their  duties  under  the  law  and  contrary  to  the
      submission of Mr Rudd the UT was not bound in these  circumstances  to
      regard the role of the social services as irrelevant. The Secretary of
      State had made the point in the decision  letter  that  there  was  no
      satisfactory evidence that  KS  had  not  coped  with  the  children's
      upbringing in BL's absence and so the UT were aware  that  this  point
      was in issue."

  12. The Respondent acknowledged that dealing with a child with ASD can  be
      challenging  and  present  its  own  difficulties  and  problems,  but
      submitted the judge failed to give reasons  as  to  why  PZ  would  be
      unable to cope such that  the  result  would  be  a  collapse  in  the
      physical, emotional, or psychological welfare of the children. As such
      the impact has not been shown to be unduly harsh or going  beyond  the
      commonplace PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213. Periods  of  difficulty
      and adjustment are envisaged  in  deportation  scenarios  and  do  not
      amount to unduly harsh consequences in themselves.

  13. The Respondent also relied on Imran (Section 117C(5); children, unduly
      harsh) [2020] UKUT 00083 (IAC):

           1. To bring a case  within  Exception  2  in  s.117C(5)  of  the
              Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  the  'unduly
              harsh' test will not be satisfied, in a case  where  a  child
              has two parents, by either or both of the following,  without
              more:

              i) evidence of the particular importance of one parent in  the
                 lives of the children; and

             ii) evidence of the emotional dependence  of  the  children  on
                 that parent and of the emotional harm that would be  likely
                 to flow from separation.

           2. Consideration as to what constitutes 'without more' is a fact
              sensitive assessment.

  14. The Respondent submitted that, although Imran was  decided  after  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  decision  was  promulgated,  the  issue  of  the
      remaining parent and their circumstances was an obvious factor in  the
      unduly harsh assessment. The judge failed to consider the  ability  of
      the mother to look after the children in the absence of the  Appellant
      or provide reasons why the Appellant is  particularly  important  such
      that his absence could not be compensated by the mother/other  support
      (as it has been previously). It was submitted that the ratio  set  out
      in Imran clearly applied, and the evidence and brief reasons  set  out
      by the judge did not amount  to  the  'without  more'  requirement  in
      Imran.  The Respondent submitted that the judge  materially  erred  in
      law and the decision should be set aside.



The Appellant's submissions

  15. In summary, the  Appellant  submitted  there  was  substantial  cogent
      evidence to demonstrate that the Appellant's  deportation  would  have
      unduly harsh consequences for his family members. The  judge  properly
      applied the relevant rules and statutory provisions and gave  adequate
      reasons for her conclusions. There was also evidence before the  judge
      which showed that the Appellant and PZ also had a caring role for PZ's
      sister's children. PZ's  sister  was  murdered  by  her  husband,  the
      children's father. There would be  serious  adverse  consequences  for
      these  children  which  further  demonstrated  that  the   Appellant's
      deportation would be unduly harsh.



Conclusions and reasons

  16. The judge's conclusions at [21] are informed by her findings  at  [13]
      to [17] and the content of the ISW's report.  These  findings  support
      the conclusion that there would be unduly  harsh  consequences  beyond
      what would necessarily be involved in the deportation of a parent.

  17. These findings also demonstrate that the Appellant's support could not
      be replaced by social services or support at school. PZ would  not  be
      able to continue in employment without the Appellant  caring  for  the
      children. The Appellant accompanies JZ to  activities  outside  school
      which PZ pays for. In the Appellant's  skeleton  argument,  which  the
      judge takes into account at [6], it was submitted that the PZ suffered
      from PTSD, anxiety and depression as a result of her  sister's  murder
      and that she could not cope without the Appellant.

  18. There is ample evidence in the ISW's report  to  support  the  judge's
      finding that it would be unduly harsh to  deport  the  Appellant.  The
      judge's findings of fact  at  [13]  to  [17]  adequately  explain  the
      judge's conclusions at [21].

  19. The judge applied to correct test in assessing whether the Appellant's
      deportation would be unduly harsh. There was ample evidence before the
      judge to demonstrate a degree of harshness  going  beyond  what  would
      necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of  a
      parent. Any failure to specifically refer to  this  evidence  was  not
      material. The judge  considered  the  evidence  as  a  whole  and  was
      entitled to attach significant weight to the ISW report.

  20. The judge cannot be criticised for failing to apply Imran, but in  any
      event there was evidence of the particular importance of the Appellant
      in the lives of the children and evidence of the emotional  dependence
      of the children, in  particular  JZ,  on  the  Appellant  and  of  the
      emotional harm that would be  likely  to  flow  from  separation  (ISW
      report at page 75 to 81).

  21. The judge's finding that the Appellant's deportation would  be  unduly
      harsh was open to her on the evidence before her and she gave adequate
      reasons for coming to that  conclusion.  Alternatively,  any  lack  of
      reasoning was not material given the strength of the  evidence  before
      the judge.

  22. At the date of hearing, the Appellant's last conviction was over eight
      years ago and he was at low risk of re-offending. JZ was 7  years  old
      and AZ was four years old. Applying section 117C, the public  interest
      requires the Appellant's deportation unless one of the  exceptions  is
      satisfied. The Appellant has  shown  that  his  deportation  would  be
      unduly harsh and he satisfies exception 2. The judge's  conclusion  at
      [22] demonstrated that she carried out a balancing  exercise  and  her
      finding that the Appellant's deportation would be disproportionate was
      open to her on the evidence before her.

  23. I find there was no material  error  of  law  in  the  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision of 14 August 2019 and I dismiss the appeal.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


      J Frances

Signed      Date: 3 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

