
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14204/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29th January 2018                     |On 26th February 2018               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                    [A A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Nigeria born on [ ]  1981.   After
    various unsuccessful applications for leave to enter in order to  study
    in the UK, the Appellant entered the UK  illegally  in  February  2010.
    Subsequently  the  Appellant  was  granted  leave  to   remain   as   a
    postgraduate student until 9th January 2014.  The Appellant returned to
    Nigeria between June and July 2012, and after  the  expiration  of  her
    visa, applied unsuccessfully  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.  Eventually on 9th June 2016 the Appellant made an application
    for asylum.  That application was refused for the reasons given  in  an
    Asylum Decision dated 15th December 2016.  The Appellant  appealed  and
    her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  E  M  M  Smith  (the
    Judge) sitting at Stoke on Trent on 4th July 2017.  He decided to allow
    the appeal on asylum grounds for the  reasons  given  in  his  Decision
    dated 11th July 2017.  The  Respondent  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision and on 6th October 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal  because  he  found  the  evidence  to  be
    credible and accepted that the Appellant had a mental health illness so
    that if she returned to Nigeria she would be perceived by her family as
    being possessed by evil spirits so that  she  and  her  children  would
    suffer persecution by way of being exorcised.  Relying  on  the  expert
    evidence of  Professor  Aguilar,  the  Judge  further  found  that  the
    Appellant could not safely  relocate  within  Nigeria  because  if  she
    returned she would be easily found by her family, and that there  would
    be no State protection for the Appellant because in Nigeria the  stigma
    of mental illness carried with it a real danger.

 4. At the hearing, Mrs Aboni submitted that the Judge had erred in law  in
    coming to this conclusion.  She referred to the grounds of  application
    and argued that the Judge had erred in failing to give adequate reasons
    for  his  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution because the Judge  had  failed  to  consider  properly  the
    prospect of safe internal relocation and whether the Appellant's family
    would be able to track her down.

 5. In response, Ms Rutherford referred to the Rule 24 response and  argued
    that there had been no such material error of law.  The credibility  of
    the Appellant had not been challenged and the Judge had  accepted  what
    the Appellant said about events in Nigeria.  The Judge  had  considered
    whether it would be unreasonable by way of being unduly harsh  for  the
    Appellant to relocate in Nigeria.  The Judge had taken into account the
    Appellant's mental health issues and  the  lack  of  support  from  her
    family at paragraph 38 of  the  Decision.   The  possibility  of  State
    protection was dealt with by the evidence of the expert witness and the
    Judge had made an appropriate finding at paragraph 31 of the  Decision.



 6. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  The sole issue in this appeal  is  whether
    the Appellant would be safe on return to Nigeria as she would  be  able
    to avoid the danger of her family treating her mental health illness as
    evidence that she was possessed by evil spirits  by  relocating  within
    Nigeria.  The Judge came to a conclusion in this respect open to him on
    the evidence before him and which he sufficiently explained.  The Judge
    was entitled to rely upon  the  unchallenged  evidence  of  an  expert,
    Professor Aguilar,  which  was  that  on  her  return  to  Nigeria  the
    Appellant could be easily located by her family wherever she went.   At
    paragraph 35 of the  Decision,  the  Judge  also  considered  that  the
    Appellant would not have the assistance of her  family  on  return  and
    that therefore she could not use her family to escape the  real  danger
    presented by the stigma associated with  mental  health  illness.   The
    Judge referred to the criteria set out in paragraph 339O of HC 395, and
    the decisions in SSHD v AH (Sudan) and others [2007] UKHL 49 and Januzi
    v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5.  There was no error of law in the decision of the
    Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date 21st February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
