
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14301/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 19 July 2019                      |on 16 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                                    MR PB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Jones, Counsel, instructed by AASK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Watson ('the judge'), promulgated on 16 May  2019,  dismissing  the
         appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  his
         asylum, humanitarian protection and family and private  life  human
         rights applications.

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. On 28  December  2018,  he
         appealed against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  him
         asylum based upon his alleged well-founded fear of persecution as a
         result of political opinion and ethnicity; and in  terms  of  there
         being substantial grounds for believing he would face a  real  risk
         of suffering serious harm on return from the UK; and that Article 8
         was not engaged in  accordance  with  Appendix  FM  and  paragraphs
         276ADE and 276CE of the Immigration Rules.

      3. In granting permission to appeal, Designated Judge Shaerf indicated
         that the grounds of appeal disclosed arguable  errors  of  law,  in
         particular that:

               i. the judge may have erred in her application of the law and
                  guidance contained in GJ and others (Sri Lanka) CG 2013 UK
                  UKUT 00319 (IAC),  and  that  the  absence  of  an  arrest
                  warrant was  not  determinative  that  the  appellant  was
                  outside risk category (a), as identified in GJ and others;

              ii.  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the   expert
                  psychiatric reports view that the appellant's suicide risk
                  would increase in the event of an enforced return.

      4. It is against this background that the appeal is listed before me.

      5. Relevant to the outcome of this onward appeal was a concession made
         by the Home Office Presenting Officer at the outset of the hearing.
         Mr Jarvis helpfully indicated that having reviewed  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge's decision, he was  satisfied  that  the  judge  had
         found in favour of the appellant in relation to the  core  elements
         of his claim, namely that:

               i. the appellant had left Sri Lanka in 1997 to move to  India
                  because his family had felt unsafe in his homeland;

              ii. in 2008 his father  had  been  arrested  on  suspicion  of
                  moving items to Sri Lanka and was watched from that point;
                  and that  the  account  of  the  father's  activities  was
                  reasonably likely;

             iii.  the  judge  could  not  find  any  discrepancy  in  dates
                  recounted in the asylum interview to cast any  doubt  upon
                  the core of the appellant's claim;

              iv. the appellant's account of being stopped at the airport in
                  2011  when  he  decided  to  return  after  his   father's
                  disappearance 'held together well' (paragraph  17  of  the
                  decision);

               v. the scarring report was consistent  with  the  appellant's
                  account;

              vi. the appellant's account of his travel to Sri Lanka in 2011
                  and his detention and subsequent interrogation and torture
                  was 'reasonably likely';

             vii. GJ confirms that the risk on return to Sri Lanka, where  a
                  person  had  previously  been  detained,  is  not  at  the
                  airport, but on return to the  returnees  home  area,  and
                  that  was  consistent  with  the  account  given  by   the
                  appellant of questioning at  the  airport  followed  by  a
                  visit to his home and detention/torture - paragraph 18;

            viii.  the  appellant   had   been   photographed   at   various
                  demonstrations  in  the  UK  (mostly  shortly  before  the
                  tribunal hearing or after the decision  was  made),  which
                  the  judge  found  was  consistent  with   his   perceived
                  sympathies in the past  and  in  line  with  his  findings
                  relating to his previous return to Sri Lanka and arrest;

              ix. the judge accepted that the appellant  was  a  member  and
                  supporter of the Transnational Government of  Tamil  Eelam
                  (the Sri Lankan government in exile  for  the  Sri  Lankan
                  Tamil diaspora) - para 19;

               x. the appellant had made a genuine  effort  to  substantiate
                  his  claim  to  asylum  and  had   satisfactory   answered
                  questions put to him;

              xi. there were no particular gaps in the documentary evidence;

             xii. the appellant statements were 'coherent and plausible' and
                  generally consistent with the  external  evidence  of  the
                  situation in Sri Lanka at the time;

            xiii. the core of the appellant's account had 'the ring of truth
                  to it' - paragraph 22.

      6. Mr Jarvis further identified that there had been  three  visits  to
         the family home in seven years, that the  appellant's  brother  had
         also disappeared, that the family had a profile, and that therefore
         the  judge's  conclusion  that  there  was  no  serious   risk   of
         persecution upon return was unsustainable to the lower threshold.

      7. In particular, he identified what  he  maintained  was  a  material
         error at paragraph 26 of the judge's decision, in that a  visit  on
         three occasions in the last seven years to his mother's home,  when
         combined with the judge's other findings, would be  deemed  by  the
         Home Office to amount to a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  requiring
         international protection and that there was support for  that  from
         the mother's evidence in that she believed  her  son  would  be  in
         danger if he was to be returned. Further, it was arguable that  the
         appellant was likely to be on a watch list, bearing in mind it  was
         accepted by the judge he had been stopped at the airport in 2011.

      8. The Secretary  of  State  was  of  the  view  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision should therefore be set aside  and  the  appeal
         allowed.

      9. Miss Jones on behalf of the appellant had nothing  to  add  to  her
         grounds of appeal,  in  the  light  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         concession.

     10. I am therefore effectively presented with a set aside by consent. I
         must of course apply my  own  mind  to  this  matter,  but  in  the
         circumstances, I see no proper reason to depart from the concession
         made by the Secretary of State.

     11. It is accepted by both parties that the consideration of risk in  a
         matter such as this is set out in the categories identified in  GJ,
         in particular:

             "(7) The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in
             detention or otherwise, are:

                  (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                  to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state  because
                  they are, or are perceived to have, a significant role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka."

     12. I accept that the judge has erred in  finding  that  the  appellant
         would not be at real risk of persecution if returned to  Sri  Lanka
         following the factual findings made above and the  lower  threshold
         in terms of standard of proof being applied.

     13. The judge  correctly  states  that  the  question  is  whether  the
         appellant will be perceived as  falling  into  this  category.  The
         judge's findings were sufficient to conclude he would be  perceived
         to have a significant role  in  relation  to  post  conflict  Tamil
         separatism and the judge has not given adequate reasons for why she
         found that not to be the case.

     14. It is an error in law to conflate absence of evidence of an  arrest
         warrant with risk under category (a), as absence of  evidence  will
         not always be determinative of a continuing adverse interest by the
         authorities. Factors that may be viewed  as  determinative  include
         the  judge's  acceptance  that  the  appellant  was  a  member  and
         supporter of  the  TGTE,  that  involvement  and  membership  is  a
         material factor in the assessment of risk on  return;  is  in  line
         with the appellant's accepted pro-Tamil nationalist sympathies; and
         that the 3 visits from the authorities in the  last  7  years  were
         indicative of a serious continued interest and risk  of  harm.  The
         appellant could not be expected to  lie  about  his  sympathies  on
         return.

     15. For the above reasons, including the concession, I  set  aside  the
         decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  this  decision
         allowing this appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.
         There is  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  as  a  result  of
         political opinion and ethnicity; and there are substantial  grounds
         for believing the appellant would face a  real  risk  of  suffering
         serious harm on return from the UK. I do not need therefore  to  go
         further and decide the other aspects of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal sitting in Birmingham  on  30  April
2019 under reference PA/14301/2018 is set aside.

AND

The appeal is allowed on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

The anonymity direction made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  preserved  in
this appeal.


Signed   [pic]
     Date 1 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams

