
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/14035/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 September 2017               |On 3 October 2017                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                HALKAWT SABIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr C Boyle, of Halliday Reeves Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson, promulgated  on  27  February
2017, which allowed the Appellant's appeal on  humanitarian  protection  and
ECHR grounds.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 14/04/1986  and  is  a  national  of  Iraq.  On
02/12/2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection  claim.




The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hindson ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 28 June 2017 Judge Page  gave
permission to appeal stating

      "The respondent has argued that the  Judge  has  failed  to  give  any
      consideration to  the  respondent's  objective  evidence  and  country
      guidance in considering whether the appellant could  relocate  to  the
      IKR. Given the paucity of reasoning in the Judge's decision which runs
      into a few paragraphs of findings I am bound to grant  the  respondent
      permission  to  appeal  when  they  are   arguing   that   no   proper
      consideration has been given to the respondent's evidence.  Permission
      to appeal is granted."


The Hearing

5. Mr M Diwnycz, for the respondent moved the grounds of  appeal,  but  told
me that he was restricted in what he could say because,  since  the  Judge's
decision was promulgated, and after the grounds of appeal had  been  lodged,
the Court of Appeal handed down the decision in AA  (Iraq)  CG  [2017]  EWCA
Civ 944. He told me that the Judge's findings are supported by AA (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944.

6. For the appellant, Mr Boyle took me to [29] of  the  decision  where  the
Judge balances the factors for and against the appellant, &  then  finds  in
the appellant's favour. He  told  me  that  at  [29]  the  Judge  manifestly
follows the guidance given in paragraphs 57 and 189 of AA (Iraq)  CG  [2017]
EWCA Civ 944. Mr Boyle reminded me that the author of the grounds of  appeal
complains that the Judge slavishly follows country guidance. He referred  me
to paragraph 12.2 of the FTTJ practice directions,  and  told  me  that  the
Judge is bound to follow country guidance unless there  is  good  reason  to
depart from it. He  told  me  that  the  Judge's  decision  is  a  carefully
reasoned decision which does not contain errors, material or  otherwise.  He
urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.


Analysis

7. The grounds of appeal focus on [28], [29] and [30] of  the  decision.  It
is common ground that the appellant  is  an  Iraqi  Kurd  from  Kirkuk.  The
grounds of appeal argue that relying on the background  materials  presented
to the Judge, the Judge should have  found  that  Kirkuk  is  safe.  In  the
alternative, the appellant could relocate to IKR.

8. The Judge's  decision  was  written  in  February  2017  and,  relied  on
background materials which were carefully considered by the Judge  at  [28].
At [28] the Judge finds that the background materials  were  not  sufficient
to overcome the guidance given in AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT  0054  (IAC).  On
22 June 2017, the Court of Appeal issued updated country guidance  on  Iraq.
In the annex to the decision of AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944  the  Court
of Appeal said

      A.     INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


         1. There is at present  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
              certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security  forces,
              militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group  known  as
              ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict  in  the  so-called
              "contested  areas",  comprising  the  governorates  of  Anbar,
              Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-din,  is
              such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds
              for believing that any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on
              account of his or her presence there, faces  a  real  risk  of
              being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting   to
              serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
              Qualification Directive.

9. In making that finding the Court of Appeal adheres to what  was  said  in
AA Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 0054 (IAC)

10. The Judge's findings at [28] and [29] are therefore safe.  There  is  no
error in the Judge's fact-finding. The  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's
claim does not  succeed  under  the  refugee  convention,  but  succeeds  on
Humanitarian Protection grounds and on article 3 ECHR grounds.  The  country
guidance given by the Court of  Appeal  in  June  2017  indicates  that  the
appellant's claim for humanitarian protection  must  succeed.  The  guidance
given by the  Court  of  Appeal  four  months  after  the  Judge's  decision
confirmed the guidance given in  2015,  and  is  directly  contrary  to  the
background reports the respondent relied on.

11. The remaining ground of appeal is a criticism of the Judge's  assessment
of risk on return. The respondent still argues that internal  relocation  is
a viable option for this  appellant.  The  respondent's  position  that  the
appellant can relocate to IKR.

12.  It  is  common  ground  that  the  appellant  comes  from  Kirkuk.  The
respondent intends to return him to Baghdad and insists that he  can  return
to his home area. The guidance given by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944 clearly indicates  that  the  respondent's  position  is
wrong. If the appellant return to his home area  he  must  succeed  both  in
terms of article 15(c) of the qualification directive and on article 3  ECHR
grounds. The question to be determined was whether or not it  is  reasonable
for the appellant to internally relocate.

13. At [29] of the decision the Judge deals  with  Internal  Relocation.  He
finds that the appellant is  a  Kurd  who  is  not  from  IKR  so  that  the
appellant could be admitted to IKR for 10 days. That 10-day  period  may  be
extended for a further 10 days. The appellant would only  have  20  days  to
try to establish himself and to find a job and accommodation.  He  would  be
competing with other young men in a region which  is  starting  to  struggle
with an influx of refugees. As a non-Arab from a minority  group  without  a
means of support in Baghdad, there will  be  significant  obstacles  to  the
appellant negotiating his way from Baghdad to IKR.

14. The findings at [29] consider the factors  set  out  in   AA  (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944. Having considered those factors, the findings that  the
Judge makes are findings which are  well  within  the  range  of  reasonable
conclusions available to the  Judge.  At  [30]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant is part of a minority group without  any  network  of  support  in
Baghdad and does not speak Arabic. He finds that the  appellant  would  face
destitution if returned to either Iraq or IKR.

 15. The appellant is a Kurdish Sunni Muslim. He has only a basic  grasp  of
the Arabic language. The background materials indicate  that  there  are  so
many internally displaced persons in Iraq that UNHCR refers  to  the  plight
of internally displaced people there as a humanitarian crisis. The  question
for the Judge was whether or not it is reasonable to make  the  appellant  a
displaced person anywhere in Iraq. It is  after  considering  those  matters
that the Judge finds that the appellant would face destitution  if  returned
to Iraq, and that internal relocation is unduly harsh.

16. The following guidance is now found in AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944

    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;


         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).




    E.     IRAQI KURDISH REGION


    17.    The Respondent will only return P to the  IKR  if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.


    18.    The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


    19.    A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain  entry
         for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a
         further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can  remain  for  longer,
         although K will need to register with the authorities  and  provide
         details of  the  employer.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.


    20.     Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably  be  expected
        to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
        to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
        assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
        IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
        employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
        family and friends in the IKR.


    21.     As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a  home
        area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.


17. On the facts as the Judge found them to be, the  appellant  has  only  a
limited grasp of Arabic. He is  distinguishable  by  his  religion  and  his
ethnicity, and so will be viewed as a member of  a  minority  community.  He
has no network of support in Iraq. Although he  is  a  Kurd,  he  has  never
lived in IKR. With that profile, it  cannot  be  reasonable  to  return  the
appellant to Iraq. Internal relocation is unduly harsh.

18. The appellant is  therefore  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  and
succeeds on article 3 ECHR grounds. That is  the  decision  that  the  Judge
came to, so that the Judge's decision  although  promulgated  prior  to   AA
(Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944
is in line with the guidance given in that case. The Judge's  findings  are
guided by and consistent with the country guidance case.

19.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

20. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.



CONCLUSION

21. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

22. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
promulgated on 27 February 2017 stands.



Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 2 October 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


