

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/14096/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |   Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25th May 2017                       |On 31st May 2017                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                MR ALI MUSAVI
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Marwha, Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnzcz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Dearden,  sitting  at
   Bradford on the 19th January 2017,  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal
   against refusal of the appellant's Protection Appeal. The appellant is an
   Iranian national who was born on the 1st January 1977.

2. The essence of the appellant's appeal was that he has a  brother,  Afshin
   Ghotbi, who is something of a sporting hero in Iran but  who  had  openly
   criticised the Iranian regime both before and after fleeing to the United
   Kingdom. Their mother became seriously ill during the course of 2015  and
   the appellant made high-level but ultimately unsuccessful representations
   to the Iranian authorities with a view to persuading them  to  allow  his
   brother to visit her in Iran prior to her death, which  occurred  on  the
   9th December 2015. During the course of making those  representations  he
   met with the Deputy Sports Minister. At that meeting, he lost his temper,
   insulted the Prophet and threatened to publish documents that would  give
   the lie to the regime's claim that his brother was guilty of tax evasion.
   In addition to fearing the consequences of his intemperate  behaviour  at
   that meeting, he fears that upon return to Iran he would be questioned by
   officials who would  force  him  to  reveal  postings  on  Facebook  that
   demonstrate his hostility to the Iranian regime.

3.  Judge  Dearden  gave  many  reasons  for  disbelieving  the  appellant's
   narrative. Those  specifically  challenged  in  the  present  appeal  may
   conveniently be summarised as follows:

        a) the regime would not have granted the  appellant  permission  to
           stand in municipal elections if they either knew or cared  about
           his postings on Facebook;

        b) the postings were not in any event critical of the regime;

        c) it was inherently unlikely that the Deputy Sports Minister would
           attend a meeting concerning whether the appellant's brother  had
           paid his taxes;

        d) it was not credible that the Iranian  authorities  would  accuse
           the appellant's brother of evading  tax  in  circumstances  when
           this was clearly contradicted by documentary  evidence  that  it
           had been deducted at source;

        e) there was  no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to  support  the
           appellant's claim that his brother had  made  critical  comments
           about the Iranian regime to both the BBC and 'Voice of America'.

   I will take the criticisms of these findings in turn.

4. The first finding is said to be based  upon  a  misunderstanding  by  the
   judge as to how Facebook operates. The  appellant  had  been  represented
   before Judge Dearden by Ms Frantzis.  Her  submissions  are  recorded  at
   paragraphs 26 to  28  of  the  Decision.  The  accuracy  of  the  judge's
   recording of one particular submission is challenged in  the  grounds  of
   appeal against his decision -

    Miss Frantzis drew attention to the various Facebook pages to be  found
    at page C3 onwards of the Respondent's bundle.  She told me  that  with
    the assistance of the Virtual Private Network (referred to at page  536
    of the Appellants bundle) it was possible for the  Appellant  to  share
    various Facebook conversations without his name appearing

   This is apparently inaccurate because, as Ms Marwaha explained it to  me,
   the effect of encrypting an internet connection via the VPN is  that  the
   authorities are unable to trace the source and  thus  the  location  from
   which the material in question has been posted. Ms  Marwaha  did  however
   acknowledge that this would  not  have  prevented  the  authorities  from
   viewing the appellant's Facebook page by other means, such  as  employing
   the simple expedient of making a  search  against  the  identity  details
   (name, date of birth, and so forth) provided  by  the  appellant  in  his
   claimed application for permission to stand as a candidate  in  municipal
   elections. Ms Marwaha acknowledged this to  be  a  possibility,  but  she
   countered that certain posts would nevertheless have been  viewable  only
   by the appellant's Facebook "friends". When I asked her refer me  to  the
   evidence that would have allowed Judge  Dearden  to  distinguish  between
   those posts that were and were not capable of being viewed by the Iranian
   authorities, she told me that a  'globe'  icon  appears  alongside  those
   posts that are open to general public viewing and that  it  follows  from
   this that posts without such an icon are  not.  Ms  Marwaha  did  however
   accept that the Facebook 'user guide', in which this  is  all  apparently
   explained, had  not  been  included  within  the  appellant's  bundle  of
   documents. I am not therefore satisfied that on  the  evidence  that  was
   before him, it was not reasonably open to the judge to conclude that  the
   Iranian authorities had viewed these posts and  had  been  untroubled  by
   them.

5. In relation to the second finding (that the posts did  not  in  an  event
   make adverse comment upon the activities of the  Iranian  regime)  it  is
   said that the judge failed to take account  of  the  appellant's  witness
   statement in which he opined that, "by sharing posts, clips and articles,
   I believe this is the same as  liking  and  advocating  posts".  This  is
   elaborated in the grounds in the following way:

    It is reasonably likely that by sharing posts from the  BBC  and  other
    international media outlets, publicising the Iran regime's actions, for
    example, public flogging, summoning to court female athletes for  being
    'half naked' and executing Christians, A's Facebook activity  shall  be
    viewed  with  disdain  by  the  Iranian  authorities  and   persecutory
    treatment shall follow.

   Thus expressed, the above is plainly nothing more than a quarrel with the
   judge's findings and does not identify any arguable error of law. I shall
   nevertheless assume that this ground was intended to mount a challenge to
   the finding on grounds of perversity. It is however noticeable that  each
   of the examples that are quoted in the grounds (above) was simply  shared
   by the appellant with his 'friends'. Moreover, the evidence in his bundle
   of documents illustrates that the 'sharing' of a post on Facebook is  but
   one of three options. The other two options  allow  the  user  either  to
   'like' or to 'comment' upon the post in question. The  appellant's  claim
   in his witness statement that 'sharing' a post is equivalent to  'liking'
   it is thus patently untrue: it is perfectly possible to  'share'  a  post
   whilst simultaneously indicating that  it  is  not  'liked'.  Absent  any
   evidence that the Iranian regime wished  to  censor  the  information  in
   question, it was thus reasonably open to the judge to conclude  that  the
   mere sharing of a purely factual news report, whilst  expressing  neither
   approval nor disapproval of its reported facts, was not and would not  be
   a cause for concern to the Iranian authorities.

6. Judge Dearden's finding  that  it  was  "inherently  unlikely"  that  the
   Deputy Sports Minister would attend a meeting with the appellant in order
   to discuss a plea for his brother to be allowed  to  visit  their  ailing
   mother was,  in  effect,  a  finding  that  it  was  implausible  that  a
   relatively  high-ranking  official  would  attend  such  a   meeting.   I
   acknowledge  that  there  is  a   need   for   caution   when   employing
   'plausibility' as a  tool  for  assessing  evidence,  given  that  it  is
   essentially a subjective concept. I am also bound to confess  that  I  am
   attracted by the arguments, advanced in the grounds, that  attendance  at
   such a meeting  by  the  Deputy  Sports  Minister  is  in  fact  entirely
   plausible when judged within its claimed context. Had this been the  sole
   basis upon which Judge Dearden had reached his decision, I may thus  have
   been persuaded to set it aside. There were however many reasons why Judge
   Dearden did not accept that such a meeting had taken place  at  all.  The
   plausibility of it being  attended  by  any  given  individual  does  not
   therefore, in my judgement, go to the core of his reasoning.

7. The following credibility finding is said by the grounds to be  "unclear"
   -

    I concluded that the Appellant was not credible when he  said  that  in
    the Persepolis football contract the employer deducted the tax and sent
    it to the Iranian equivalent of the Inland Revenue but the  appellant's
    brother is accused of not paying his tax.

   I am afraid to say that I am unable to see what is "unclear"  about  that
   finding. When it is read in context, it is clear that Judge  Dearden  did
   not find it credible  that  the  Iranian  authorities  would  accuse  the
   appellant's brother of not paying tax on his earnings for the  Persepolis
   football club when such an  accusation  could  readily  be  disproved  by
   reference to his contract.

8. Finally, it is said that  Judge  Dearden  acted  unfairly  in  making  an
   adverse credibility finding against the appellant concerning his  failure
   to produce evidence from YouTube to back up his claim  that  his  brother
   had publicly criticised the Iranian regime. That criticism is based  upon
   the following passage in the decision -

       The brother is said to have made certain comments to the BBC and  to
       the Voice of America news criticising the Iranian regime  for  their
       interference in football.  In fact no objective evidence is produced
       to me confirming that such criticism took place  thereby  preventing
       the brother from returning to Iran.  Miss  Frantzis  says  that  the
       Appellant is not well versed in the types of  evidence  required  in
       immigration proceedings, but in my conclusion  his  solicitors  are.



   On a fair reading of that paragraph, however,  it  is  clear  that  Judge
   Dearden was criticising the appellant's representatives, rather than  the
   appellant, for failing to make advance  arrangements  to  facilitate  the
   viewing of any relevant video clips during  the  course  of  hearing  the
   evidence, rather than attempting to do so 'on the hoof' after Counsel had
   begun her closing  submissions.  Furthermore,  it  is  clear  that  Judge
   Dearden's observation concerning the absence of independent  evidence  to
   support this particular aspect of the appellant's claim did not extend to
   a finding that its existence had been invented.

9. I am thus satisfied that the grounds of appeal upon which  permission  to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted amount to nothing  more  than  a
   quarrel with findings that, with one possible and  immaterial  exception,
   were reasonably open to the judge on the evidence that  was  before  him.
   Moreover, it seems to me that this ought to have  been  apparent  to  the
   judge who found there to be "arguable points" in the grounds,  the  legal
   nature of which were not identified in granting permission to appeal.

Anonymity is not directed

Signed                              Date: 26th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

