
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14015/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th December 2017                     |On 23rd January 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    [n b]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr.Wood, Counsel, instructed by IAS[Manchester]
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on [ ] 1987.  She applied  for
    a Tier 4 dependent partner visa in April 2010.  She came to the  United
    Kingdom upon that visa and leave to remain on that  basis  was  granted
    until 30th September 2014 and thereafter leave to remain  was  refused.
    The appellant exercised her right of appeal against that refusal  at  a
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in May 2015 in which her  appeal
    was dismissed.  On 7th June 2016 the appellant claimed asylum  but  was
    refused in a decision of 5th December 2016.

2.   The reason for the asylum was  the  appellant's  claimed  fear  of  her
    parents and in particular the parents of her  spouse,  given  that  the
    relationship with him had broken down  because  of  domestic  violence.
    Seemingly in October 2015  she  had  contacted  the  police  about  his
    violence towards her which violence continued in May 2016  and  he  was
    arrested in May 2016.  The appellant was supplied with a social  worker
    and given accommodation away from her husband.  Her contention is  that
    her parents do not support her separation from her husband but wish her
    to return to him and she believes that her parents-in-law will  do  her
    harm if she returns.

3.   Currently therefore she is a single person with a  child  born  on  4th
    March 2011.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against the decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Durance on 19th January  2017.   In  a
    subsequent determination the appeal was dismissed on all  grounds.   It
    was the finding of the Judge that the appellant could safely return  to
    India with her child.   Challenge to that decision was made on a number
    of grounds.  Leave was granted to the Upper Tribunal on the basis of  a
    failure to properly consider the reasonableness of relocation,  failure
    to factor into the proportionality assessment that the appellant was  a
    victim of domestic violence.

5.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine that issue.

6.   At the hearing before the Fist-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant  did  not
    appear. She wrote a letter asking for an adjournment on the basis  that
    she was not very well.  She said that she had  a  heart  issue  and  in
    support thereof enclosed a statement from the doctor as to her  fitness
    to work for 19th January 2017. She had palpitations and was referred to
    cardiology. That statement gave little indication as to the real  state
    of her health and gave no indication as to why she could not attend the
    hearing.  It is understandable in the circumstances why an  adjournment
    was not granted, particularly as within this case no challenge was made
    to the credibility of the appellant but rather to the issue  of  safety
    return.

7.   It was the finding of the Judge that, notwithstanding  that  she  would
    not receive the support from her parents, she could safely relocate  to
    another part of India especially to one of the large urban centres.

8.   The Judge found there to be an internal  flight  alternative  available
    to the appellant. Although, as a single woman with a child, her  return
    to India would not be without difficulties she was  well  educated  and
    skilled. In many respects that set  her  apart  from  many  of  the  36
    million women who reside in India who are single, divorced and widowed.
     By moving to an urban centre it was found that she was more likely  to
    benefit from  the  domestic  violence  provisions  highlighted  by  the
    Secretary of State. It was noted the Indian government operated a  form
    of welfare for single women who are fleeing from domestic violence  and
    that  such  welfare  includes  the  provision  of   accommodation   and
    childcare.  In terms of the appellant's daughter she was of a young age
    and her best interests were considered to be with  her  mother  in  her
    native culture.  It was noted there was free education for children  in
    India and systems  in  place  to  facilitate  child  care  for  working
    mothers.

9.   The burden of Mr Wood's submissions are essentially  threefold,  namely
    that the Judge should have given greater weight in the consideration of
    proportionality to the fact that the appellant is a victim of  domestic
    abuse.  Secondly, that the background material as  presented  indicates
    that  the  shelters  provided  would  be  insanitary  and   would   not
    accommodate children and thirdly,  that  the  appellant  has  now  been
    diagnosed  with  postural  tachycardia  syndrome  (PoTS)  which   would
    restrict her ability to work in India.

10.  In terms of the fact that the appellant is a victim of domestic  abuse,
    it is to be noted that when  she  joined  her  husband  in  the  United
    Kingdom, it was on the basis that he too had limited leave  to  remain.
    It is for this reason that the domestic abuse did  not  enable  her  to
    acquire settled status under the Immigration Rules.  Although  violence
    was clearly perpetrated upon her, there is no indication that that  has
    affected her mentally or in her ability to  live  a  normal  life.   In
    those circumstances she does not present as  a  vulnerable  person  but
    essentially as a person who has no family support upon return.  Clearly
    had there been evidence of post-traumatic stress it would have been  an
    important factor to have borne in mind.

11.  The decision letter sets out in some detail the support that  would  be
    available upon return to India as a lone female, references being  made
    particularly to the Ministry of Women and Child Development which  runs
    over 600 shelter homes for women.  The  SWADHR  shelter  homes  provide
    food, clothing and counselling services in addition  to  accommodation.
    There are also non-governmental run shelters.  There  are  800  hostels
    mainly in cities where working woman can live for  up  to  three  years
    some hostels have day  care  centres  for  children.   They  also  have
    programmes to support training and  employment  which  conducts  skills
    training.  It is said there are  14,059  training  centres  across  the
    country.

12.  Reference is made also to  the  Immigration  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    report and noted in a response dated 16th May 2013 that the  number  of
    women in the Indian workforce has nearly doubled between 1996 and 2001.
     Women are filling positions in new industries and in  some  previously
    male dominated industries. It was noted an increased number  of  female
    doctors, scientists and professors an increasing number of young  women
    joining the workforce and increased job opportunities.

13.  A number of networks are cited in the decision said to be available  to
    assist the appellant in respect of employment.

14.  The decision is a  wide  ranging  one,  setting  out  many  aspects  of
    support potentially available to the appellant.  Mr Wood, however,  has
    sought to highlight one aspect between paragraphs  50  and  57  of  the
    refusal letter.  Such indicates that, according to the Indian  Planning
    Commission, the working women's hostels have only basic  facilities  of
    inferior quality with poor sanitary conditions.   He  submits  that  in
    those circumstances it will not be appropriate to live in such  hostels
    or indeed to have a child in such hostels.  It is far from  clear  from
    the actual passage, as to whether that comment applies to  all  hostels
    or merely to some hostels. Very much will, in any  event,  depend  upon
    whether there is any work for the appellant and whether she can  afford
    accommodation on her own right or not.  Many of the hostels  of  course
    are designed for women rescued from the sex trade or  escaping  abusive
    relationships in India.  Such does not apply to the appellant  in  this
    case.  Some hostels do not take children.  However it is clear from the
    overall context of what is said in the decision letter  that  there  is
    generally support and skills training available.  Having regard to  the
    material as set out in the decision letter, I find that the  Judge  was
    entitled to come to the conclusions as to return which he did.

15.  The third aspect is the health of the  appellant.   It  said  that  the
    judge was put on notice that the appellant could  not  work,  but  that
    seems to me to be a rather broad statement to arise out  of  a  medical
    note as to  fitness  to  work.   This  is  particularly  so  given  the
    immigration context  in  which  the  appellant  should  not  have  been
    working.  There is nothing in that particular medical note to  indicate
    the nature and seriousness of the condition or the length upon of  time
    that should  be  taken  off  work.  It  made  but  brief  reference  to
    palpitations referred to  cardiology.   Subsequent  to  the  hearing  a
    bundle has been prepared to show that the appellant suffers  from  PoTS
    syndrome. A detailed note of what that involves  is  extracted  from  a
    website and Wikipedia.  This is singularly unhelpful as a report, which
    provides much guidance. Such  indicates  that  some  people  have  mild
    syndromes and in others the condition  affects  the  quality  of  their
    life.  It said that PoTS often improves gradually over time and that  a
    number of self care measures and medications for that can help.

16.  There is an NHS letter of  24th  October  2017,  which  sets  out  some
    preliminary observations  as  to  the  investigations  that  are  being
    conducted in connection with the health of  the  appellant.   There  is
    however no indication of seriousness or indication as to  what  affect,
    if any, that condition will have impractical terms upon the ability  of
    the appellant to conduct  her  life.   It  merely  indicates  that  the
    appellant has attended for some tests revealing normal left ventricular
    function and normal right ventricular function.  It said that there are
    no significant valvular disease.  There only seems to be a diagnosis of
    PoTS syndrome and  there  is  little  further  indication  as  to  what
    practical effect that will have in the future.

17.  No doubt if there is significant disability afforded by  that  syndrome
    that can be the subject of further evidence submitted to the respondent
    in support of a fresh claim.  It does not however go  to  indicate  any
    error of law in the decision of the judge.

18.  Overall I find that the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  it  was  not
    unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect the appellant to return to India
    with her child.

19.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

20.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  upheld  namely  that
    the asylum appeal  is  dismissed,  that  in  relation  to  humanitarian
    protection is dismissed as is that in relation to human rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 19 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD














