
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14206/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2018                  |On 23 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Boyle, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S P J Buchanan  promulgated  on  27  February
    2017 in which he allowed the appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    made on 15 December 2016 to refuse his claim for asylum.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is a gay man and faces  persecution  on
    return to the Gambia for that reason.  He says that he became aware  of
    his sexuality when he was aged between 12 and  14  and  had  started  a
    relationship with a boy at school which then  came  to  the  notice  of
    others despite having taken precautions against discovery  and  he  was
    then expelled from school.  His mother's shop was vandalised and so  he
    moved to Dakar, Senegal, where in March 2014 he was attacked whilst  in
    company of another gay man because of their sexuality.  He was detained
    and ill-treated and eventually fled to the United Kingdom via France.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept, for the reasons set out  in  the
    refusal letter, that the appellant is a gay man or  that  he  would  be
    perceived as such although [43] she accepted that members of  the  LGBT
    community in Gambia and Senegal may be persecuted and that  persecution
    may be either state sponsored or state condoned.  It was also  accepted
    that a member of the LGBT community would not be able to live an openly
    gay lifestyle in Gambia and Senegal without fear  of  severe  reprisals
    [47].

 4. The judge heard evidence from the appellant concluding [7.11] to [7.14]
    and considered all the evidence that the appellant is  a  gay  man  and
    that his appeal be allowed on  that  basis.   The  judge  rejected  the
    respondent's challenges [7.12] and accepted the appellant's account.

 5. It follows his findings the judge accepted that the appellant had  been
    perceived to be gay and has suffered on that reason both in the  Gambia
    and in Senegal.

 6. The respondent appealed on the grounds that the judge,  had  failed  to
    set out the approach in HJ Iran [2010] UKSC 31 in particular failing to
    consider whether the appellant could  live  openly  as  a  gay  man  on
    return.

 7. On 28 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Page  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 8. It is important to note in the context of  the  findings  made  by  the
    judge in this case that despite trying to be discreet, the  appellant's
    relationship with his friend first at school had come to the  attention
    of a female friend - see paragraphs [6.5] and [7.5].

 9. Two things follow from  this.   First,  that  despite  trying  to  live
    discreetly the appellant had been perceived to be a  gay  man  and  had
    suffered ill-treatment as  a  result.   Second,  the  attempt  to  live
    discreetly was out of fear.  The appellant's evidence  was  "we  didn't
    show to the outside world because we knew that it was not  accepted  in
    our community.  We were very careful."

10. Whilst the judge does not set out the three step process identified  in
    HJ (Iran) I am not satisfied that  his  error  is  material.   That  is
    because the appellant has already suffered ill-treatment on account  of
    his sexual orientation  which  became  known  despite  attempts  to  be
    discreet and there is no evidence of any particular change since  that.
    It follows further that even were the appellant  to  attempt  again  to
    hide his sexuality by being discreet  that  he  did  so  out  of  fear.
    Openly, in this context, is country specific and in  this  case  it  is
    clear that even discreet relationships  where  precautions  were  taken
    were unacceptable and resulted in ill-treatment.

11. Accordingly, I conclude that  the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  is
    sustainable on the basis of the findings of fact made by the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error of law and I uphold it.

      2) I maintain the anonymity decision made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 22 March 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
