
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/14377/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th December 2017                         |On 23rd January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     MBM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes of Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
& Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Senegal born on [ ] 1978.  He  sought  to
    claim asylum on the basis  essentially  of  his  sexuality.   This  was
    refused by the respondent in a decision dated 19th December 2016.   The
    appellant sought to appeal against that  decision,  which  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt  on  2nd  February  2017.   In  a
    determination dated 28th February 2017 the appeal was dismissed in  all
    aspects.

2.   Challenge has  been  made  to  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  undue
    speculation, employment of a  stereotype  and  the  unfairness  of  the
    interview.  Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  given  in
    such matters.  Thus the appeal comes before me to determine the issues.

3.   While the appellant claims that  he  was  in  a  long  term  homosexual
    relationship with K in Senegal their relationship came to be discovered
    when they attended a homosexual marriage in the village.  The appellant
    came to the United Kingdom and has lost contact with K although he  has
    tried to telephone him on a number of occasions without any success.

4.   Prior to coming to the  United  Kingdom  the  appellant  lived  with  a
    Swedish couple in Gambia for  some  six  months  and  they  arranged  a
    passport and visa for  the  appellant.   Since  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom the appellant has not engaged in any  homosexual  relationship,
    although he has attended an organisation called Icebreakers which is  a
    meeting forum for gay people.

5.   The Judge did not find the account of how he came to be  discovered  in
    Senegal  as  credible.   He  found  the  appellant  to   lack   further
    credibility in the failure to make contact with K  and  to  give  vague
    answers as to what he is doing in Icebreakers.

6.   A key finding of the Judge was that the account  of  the  discovery  in
    Senegal was not credible.  Given the community hostility shown  to  the
    gay culture, it lacked credibility that there would  be  such  an  open
    marriage in the village.  No challenge has been made to that finding in
    the grounds of appeal.

7.   This is an appeal based almost exclusively upon what the appellant  has
    to say about himself and the relationships and as such  credibility  is
    an important element within that context.

8.   It is contended on behalf of the appellant by Mr  Holmes  that  he  was
    not given a fair opportunity of expressing himself and his relationship
    with K in the interview.  He was hampered because his  first  language,
    and indeed the language in which he gave evidence at the  hearing,  was
    Wolof.  The attention  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  indeed  my
    attention was drawn to the decision  in  Dirshe  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  421
    emphasising that the interview was a critical part of the procedure for
    determining the asylum decisions and that every opportunity  should  be
    given to appellants in those circumstances to express themselves in the
    best possible way particularly being given the opportunity of  speaking
    in a language of their choice.

9.   It is to be noted in that connection the screening interview  conducted
    with the appellant on 20th June 2016.  In that he  indicated  that  his
    main language was French. Indeed the request  which  was  made  on  his
    behalf  by  those  representing  him  was  to  have  a  female   French
    interpreter present at the substantive interview.  This  was  done  but
    two days before the schedule date of the  interview  that  request  was
    changed to a Wolof speaking interpreter.

10.  At  the  interview  the  French  interpreter  was  used  and  some  128
    questions were asked of the appellant as recorded.   At  the  interview
    the  appellant  was  asked  whether  he   understood   everything   the
    interpreter had said and he said yes and  expressed  himself  as  being
    happy with the conduct of the interview and with the interpreter.  That
    was an interview conducted on 1st December 2016.

11.   Immediately  following  the  interview,  however,  by  letter  of  6th
    December  2016  the  solicitors  acting  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    expressed concern, saying that it was clear from the interview  records
    that the appellant has struggled  with  being  interviewed  in  French.
    Complaint was made that it was not an interview that had been  recorded
    and in particular that the appellant would  have  found  it  easier  to
    explain his deeply personal  experiences  and  emotions  in  his  first
    language of Wolof.

12.  Although it is contended that the appellant  misunderstood  certain  of
    the questions it is far from clear as  what  those  questions  were  or
    indeed the nature of  the  misunderstanding.   What  emerges  from  the
    detailed letter is rather that the appellant is seeking to  build  upon
    the answers that were given in interview in more detail.   He  contends
    that he and K were together for eight to nine years until  the  day  he
    last saw him on 25th December 2015.

13.  In terms of his experience in the  Gambia  that  is  set  out  in  some
    detail at paragraph 109 of the letter namely that when his friend, with
    whom he had been staying in Banjul, found out about his  sexuality  the
    appellant went to the other side of the city where he met a man who let
    him stay at his house for six months.  The appellant spent most of  the
    time indoors.  The letter also sets out some  country  information  and
    guidance.

14.  The letter from  those  acting  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  though
    seeking to criticise the interview, failed  to  indicate  that  it  was
    incorrectly interpreted or misunderstood.  The fact that  an  appellant
    may want to give more details within the confinement of  the  interview
    is quite a different matter.  He  clearly  has  been  able  to  express
    himself in fuller terms in the letter written  by  the  representatives
    following the interview  indeed  is  a  witness  statement  dated  27th
    January 2017.  It was clear that the Judge has that in mind.  The Judge
    was also invited to consider the case of Dirshe and has  in  mind  also
    the letter of 19th December  2016  which  amplified  the  questions  in
    interview.  The Judge  has  indicated  that  he  has  considered  those
    matters with care.  It seems therefore that  with  the  combination  of
    interview, submissions and statement,  the  appellant  has  been  in  a
    position  to  express  himself  as  fully  as  he  may  be  as  to  the
    circumstances of his claim.  The appellant also had a Wolof interpreter
    at the hearing and was able, should he so  desired,  to  have  expanded
    upon his case then.  In the circumstances I find no unfairness  in  the
    procedure or  any  undue  restriction  placed  upon  the  appellant  in
    expressing  his  claim.   The  Judge  found  at  paragraph  19  of  the
    determination that there were open questions asked of the appellant  at
    interview which would have given him  the  opportunity  to  discuss  in
    greater detail the relationship with K.  The Judge found, however, that
    the appellant had given "wooden" responses which lacked any texture  or
    which had the hallmarks of  a  genuine  spontaneous  evidence  on  this
    aspect.  The Judge found that the criticism of the interpreter  was  an
    unsatisfactory response to the lack of detail in  interview.  The  fact
    that an appellant may wish to amplify what was said in  interview  does
    not of itself make the interview unfair without some  clear  indication
    as to what was defective about it.  I find little merit in  the  Dirshe
    point as directed to this case.

15.  It was also contended that  the  Judge  engaged  in  undue  speculation
    concerning the  attempts  of  the  appellant  to  contact  K.   As  the
    appellant said, he phoned the home on a  number  of  occasions  without
    success but had not followed matters up any further.

16.  At paragraph 21 of the determination the  Judge  found  it  simply  not
    believable that K has  disappeared  without  trace  and  there  was  no
    evidence to show any attempts by the appellant to get back  in  contact
    with him.  The suggestion is canvassed that  communication  may  be  by
    Facebook that of course begs the question as to whether  the  appellant
    and K ever employed that medium.  It is said that the Judge perhaps was
    over strong in his criticism of the appellant who had done all that  he
    could possibly do in the circumstances to  make  contact.   K  was  not
    there it was difficult to  ask  families  and  friends  to  locate  him
    without disclosing the nature of the relationship.

17.  I find that there is some merit in that  concern  but  equally  in  the
    statement the appellant seeks to give some detail about K whom he  knew
    from his community that they had known each  other  for  the  whole  of
    their lives and had grown up together, lived at  an  apartment  on  the
    second floor of a building which K's friend was renting, first met  him
    at a party, people were present, he seemingly had a house  as  well  as
    the apartment because of that relationship they met other  people  whom
    they had discussions as to  the  difficulties  experienced  with  their
    sexuality.

18.  K had a rented apartment and there were other families  living  in  the
    building. As the appellant claims that he was in this relationship  for
    eight to ten years, he and K would have met many people over that time,
    including those who were living  in  the  same  apartment  as  he  did.
    Indeed the couple who married so openly also were  neighbours  in  that
    apartment.

19.  In those situations it is understandable  that  the  Judge  would  have
    considered that there were more avenues to have been explored in  order
    to find K and people who they knew together possibly to be  questioned.
    Although to some extent it is speculation about Facebook,  nevertheless
    they were part of a community for a considerable  period  of  time  and
    there is some merit in the concern of the Judge that apart from  making
    telephone calls nothing further has been done to try and locate him.

20.  One matter, which weighed heavily with the  Judge  in  considering  the
    matter of credibility, was the account of going to  Gambia  and  living
    with the family until his forged Swedish passport  was  obtained.   The
    Judge did not find it credible that the appellant did not disclose  his
    reason for leaving to such people who  were  organising  his  passport.
    However the Judge considered  that  they  were  smugglers  rather  than
    family.  It seems to me that that was a reasonable conclusion  to  have
    come to, particularly as the appellant was  introduced  to  a  man  who
    would help him get a passport and pay  US$1,000  for  it.   The  family
    bought his flight tickets and paid for his journey out of Gambia.

21.  It was also said by Mr Holmes, on behalf of  the  appellant,  that  the
    Judge fell into the danger of seeking  to  place  the  appellant  in  a
    stereotype.  Comment was made that he did not involve  himself  in  the
    "gay scene" in Manchester with its gay friendly pubs and clubs.  It  is
    suggested that is perhaps an unfair criticism to make, particularly  to
    ignore the different culture in which the appellant has come  it  would
    seem certainly in Senegal that the appellant and K kept  themselves  to
    themselves, there is no reason at  all  why  the  appellant  should  be
    conformed to a stereotype  of  enjoying  clubs  and  pubs  rather  than
    keeping himself to himself.  It was also said that  the  Judge  perhaps
    unfairly criticised the appellant for his lack of knowledge  about  the
    institution of Icebreakers which he said  that  he  attended  on  three
    occasions on Wednesday evenings.  The point is  made,  particularly  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch in granting permission, that it perhaps  was
    inaccurate for the Judge to criticise his lack of detail on that matter
    when the Record of Proceedings would seem to indicate that he had given
    a much greater range of answers about those meetings.

22.  As Mr Holmes indicates, the appellant had only  recently  come  to  the
    United Kingdom it was understandable that he would  be  cautious  about
    entering into any new relationship, particularly as he  contended  that
    his abiding  emotional  attachment  was  to  K  and  remains  so.   The
    appellant indicated, in the course of the hearing, that he had not  had
    the money to come into the centre of Manchester  very  often  that  the
    visits to Icebreakers was a tentative venture  to  try  and  make  some
    friends and contacts.

23.  Equally it is understandable  that  the  Judge,  when  considering  the
    question of whether the appellant was gay, to note that now that  there
    was freedom to express himself fully in that regard he chose not to  do
    so.  As he indicated he had had no homosexual relations  since  leaving
    Senegal. Were that criticism as to stereotypes stand in isolation  from
    the overall context of the case, then I  can  readily  understand  that
    that might find the ground to call for  a  rehearing.  However,  it  is
    clear from the context of the determination, that the Judge had  looked
    at a number of matters both in isolation and in combination.  The Judge
    did not find that the incident which prompted  the  departure  and  the
    separation from K in fact happened. Notwithstanding the  claim  by  the
    appellant that K was central to his life, little had been done to  make
    enquiries about him, there by calling into question whether it is  said
    that  the  relationship  is  truthful.   In  determining  whether   the
    appellant indeed is homosexual regard was had to the fact that  he  had
    no sexual partners in the United Kingdom and had done  very  little  on
    the gay scene.  Indeed the appellant had not even told the  family  who
    assisted him in leaving to the  United  Kingdom  about  his  sexuality,
    although clearly they would have been concerned as to why he needed  to
    leave in the first place.

24.  All those factors led the Judge to conclude that the appellant was  not
    credible and was not homosexual.

25.  I find looked at overall, that that was a finding  which  was  open  to
    the Judge to come to.  There is no indication that the Judge has failed
    to consider the matters that were raised by the appellant.

26.  In all the circumstances therefore, although  there  are  clearly  some
    errors in the approach that were taken, such do not serve to taint  the
    overall finding that the Judge has  made  that  the  appellant  is  not
    credible as to his account and not homosexual in his orientation.

27.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed and the findings of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.  The
    appellant's  appeal  for  asylum  is  dismissed  that  in  relation  to
    humanitarian protection is dismissed as is that in  relation  to  human
    rights.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                 [pic]                 Date 19 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


