
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14130/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2019                       |On 12 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'HA'
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
The anonymity direction previously made by the First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')
continues to apply. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr H Ali, representative
For the Secretary of State:     Mr S Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant, against the  decision  of  the  FTT
    (the 'Decision')  promulgated  on  6  March  2019,  in  which  the  FTT
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal by  the  Secretary
    of  State  ('the  respondent')  to  grant   asylum   and   humanitarian
    protection; and  leave  to  remain  based  on  his  human  rights.  The
    respondent had issued a refusal decision on 19 November 2018.

 2. In essence,  the  core  points  taken  against  the  appellant  by  the
    respondent focussed on two sets of  connected  issues:  his  protection
    claim; and his claim based on his family life with his wife, a  British
    citizen of Kurdish/Iraqi national origin.

 3. In respect of the protection claim, the respondent did not accept  that
    the appellant had encountered adverse interest from  the  family  of  a
    former girlfriend with  whom  he  had  claimed  to  have  eloped.   The
    respondent regarded as  internally  inconsistent  the  claim  that  the
    couple had informed their respective families of  their  love  for  one
    another and their desire to marry; and yet their families  had  allowed
    them to continue to communicate; and to  leave  Iraq.   The  respondent
    also  considered,  and  applied,  section  8(4)  of  the   Asylum   and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004. The appellant  travelled
    through, but did not claim asylum in, Hungary.  The respondent did  not
    accept the explanation he did not claim asylum there as he was  advised
    not to do so, because it was not safe in  Hungary,  by  the  agent  who
    accompanied him. The respondent did not accept the claim that an arrest
    warrant which had been issued, accusing him of  kidnapping  his  former
    girlfriend, was genuine, or that he  would  be  of  continuing  adverse
    interest from his former partner's family.

 4. In respect of the  human  rights  claims,  the  respondent  noted  that
    appellant had entered the United Kingdom ('UK') on 17 June  2016,  aged
    23 and had only lived in the UK for 3 years and 4 months at the date of
    the respondent's decision. While he had married  his  current  partner,
    who had indefinite leave to remain, on 16 March 2018, whom he  had  met
    two months previously, the respondent did not accept at that stage that
    they were in a genuine and subsisting relationship. If they  were,  the
    appellant could return to Iraq and reapply for entry clearance.

FTT's decision

 5. The FTT found that  the  appellant  had  not  established  his  general
    credibility, and his evidence was not coherent or  plausible.  The  FTT
    noted that the  appellant  claimed  to  have  developed  a  clandestine
    relationship over many months where the objective  evidence  suggesting
    that a girl could be killed by her own family just because she fell  in
    love; the couple had been  able  to  inform  their  families  of  their
    relationship and intention to marry yet were able  to  obtain  both  of
    their passports; remain in contact; and leave Iraq.  The claim  of  the
    family reporting matters to the local police a  couple  of  days  after
    leaving in 2015 was not plausible  in  the  context  of  the  objective
    evidence of a limited appetite for police and courts to be involved  in
    family matters. The FTT did not regard as plausible the account of  how
    the appellant recovered his passport via  unnamed  agents;  or  how  he
    obtained a copy of a police arrest warrant, namely because a cousin had
    visited the family home and had merely found the warrant and  taken  it
    without the appellant's family knowing.

 6. The FTT regarded the appellant's  return  to  Iraq  feasible  ([61]  to
    [66]), on the basis that the appellant has a passport and his  CSID  is
    in Kirkuk, and he could obtain this from his cousin; he had  previously
    fought with the Kurdish Peshmerga; and he would  have  assistance  from
    his wife's family on returning to the  Independent  Kurdish  Region  of
    Iraq ('IKR'), where they live.

 7. Whilst the FTT found that the appellant is in  a  genuine  relationship
    with his wife, the appellant's immigration status  was  precarious,  in
    the context of his protection claim having  been  fabricated.  The  FTT
    concluded that tittle weight should be applied to his private life  for
    the purpose of section 117B(5)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. The FTT did not  accept  that  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  of
    Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  was  met,  as  there  were  not
    insurmountable obstacles to family life between the appellant  and  his
    wife continuing in the IKR. She spoke the local language, had  extended
    family there, had knowledge of the cultural customs, could practice her
    religion; and would be able to enter using her British passport. Whilst
    it was more likely the appellant would return alone to Iraq and  whilst
    he couldn't currently meet the financial requirements  while  his  wife
    was a student, the FTT noted that her studies would soon  end  and  her
    income could then increase. The FTT noted that there  was  no  evidence
    before  it  to  conclude  that  any  temporary  separation   would   be
    disproportionate and in breach of the appellant's article 8 rights.

 8. For the above reasons, the FTT rejected the appellant's appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. While not numbered as we have done so below, the grounds appear  to  be
    as follows:

     . ground (1) - the FTT had failed to take into  account  the  security
       situation  in  Iraq  and  in  particular  the  country  policy   and
       information or 'CPIN' of  November  2018,  in  the  context  of  its
       assessment of whether the appellant's  wife  could  be  expected  to
       return to Iraq ([2] of the grounds);

     . ground (2) - the FTT failed to consider if  the  appellant's  wife's
       income was likely to be sufficient for the  appellant  to  meet  the
       income requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  an  application  for
       entry clearance would then be disproportionate, noting the principle
       in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 ([3] of the grounds);

     . ground (3) - the FTT had failed to consider the  respondent's  delay
       in refusing the appellant's appeal, which  meant  that  family  life
       developed in the meantime, noting the principle in EB Kosovo v  SSHD
       [2008] UKHL 41 ([4] of the grounds);

     . ground (4) - the FTT had referred to the CPIN for Iraq, but had  not
       referred to the underlying source material referred to in the CPIN -
       'Kurdish Honour Crimes' of August 2017,  which  suggested  that  the
       appellant would be  at  high  risk  of  being  killed  ([6]  of  the
       grounds);

     . ground (5) - the FTT had not explained adequately  why  it  regarded
       the appellant's failure to have claimed asylum in  Hungary  was  not
       reasonable ([8] of the grounds);

     . ground (6) - the FTT had not explained adequately  why  it  regarded
       the appellant's account of how he received his passport  and  arrest
       warrant as not plausible ([13] of the grounds);

     .  ground (7) the FTT's conclusion that the appellant could return  on
       a domestic flight to the IKR is not consistent  with  the  objective
       evidence, specifically the CPIN of October 2018, which stated that a
       person attempting to  enter  the  IKR,  if  from  Kirkuk,  would  be
       returned to Kirkuk.

10. Grounds (1) to (3) focussed on  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim;
    whilst grounds [4] to [7] focused on the protection claim.

11. First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker granted permission  on  29  April
    2019.

The hearing before us

The appellant's submissions

12. Whilst granting permission to appeal on all grounds, Judge  Scott-Baker
    noted that in respect of  the  protection  appeal,  given  all  of  the
    evidence before the FTT, its findings were arguably  open  to  it.  Her
    view was the same in respect of the  issue  of  the  viability  of  the
    appellant's return in  the  context  of  the  security  situation.  Her
    concerns were on arguable failures  in  respect  of  an  assessment  of
    continuation of family life and the sufficiency of  reasoning  on  that
    issue. Whilst we indicated that it was our provisional  view  only,  on
    the papers before us, we agreed with Judge Scott Baker's analysis  that
    the FTT's findings in respect of the protection claim were open  to  it
    and disclosed no error of law. We nevertheless invited Mr Ali, who  was
    content for us to indicate our provisional view, to  make  any  further
    submissions if he wished to on the point.  He  was  content  merely  to
    rely on the written grounds in respect of the protection appeal.

13. In respect of the human rights  appeal,  Mr  Ali  reiterated  that  the
    appellant's wife had been in the United Kingdom since 2004, aged 7. The
    FTT had proceeded on a factual error that she was due to  complete  her
    legal studies at the end of March 2019, when in fact she was continuing
    to study until the 2020. This was  important  as  the  FTT  erroneously
    assumed the couple's separation would only be temporary, when it  would
    not, as the wife's continuation of her studies meant that the appellant
    would not meet the income requirements of the Immigration Rules.

14. Mr Ali reiterated the delay in the respondent's decision, during  which
    time the couple developed their family life.  The  FTT  had  failed  to
    consider this in the proportionality exercise.

The respondent's submissions

15. We indicated that Mr Lindsay did not need to address us, in the absence
    of further submissions from Mr Ali, on the protection appeal.

16. In respect of the human rights appeal, Mr Lindsay argued that  the  FTT
    had plainly considered the situation on the ground in Iraq and  whether
    these would present any obstacles to the couple's return there at  [62]
    of the Decision. The FTT had noted that the appellant  had  a  passport
    and would be able to obtain his CSID,  as  well  as  support  from  his
    wife's  family.  There  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  FTT  had
    considered  irrelevant  material;  or  failed  to   consider   relevant
    material.

17. The FTT have not reached the conclusion that a future  application  for
    entry clearance by  the  appellant  would  be  bound  to  succeed.  The
    argument that the appellant's wife's income would be limited until 2020
    went against the argument that the 'Chikwamba' principle should  apply,
    ie.  that  return   and   reapplication   for   entry   clearance   was
    disproportionate.

Error of law discussion

Grounds (1) to (3) - human rights appeal

18. In relation to ground (1), the FTT  considered  the  CPIN  of  November
    2018, referring to it, albeit briefly, at [27] of the Decision.  It was
    unarguably open to the FTT to find that there  are  not  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with the appellant and his wife continuing  in
    the IKR, noting that she has extended family there  who  would  support
    her; she has visited the IKR previously; and she would be able to enter
    the IKR using her British passport. The general commentary on the wider
    security situation in Iraq, referred  to  in  the  CPIN,  is  something
    which, while  potentially  relevant  by  way  of  background,  was  not
    inconsistent with the FTT's findings on the viability  of  family  life
    continuing within the IKR.  The FTT's findings disclosed  no  error  of
    law.

19. In relation to ground (2), we accepted Mr  Lindsay's  submissions  that
    even if the FTT had proceeded on the factual error that the appellant's
    wife's studies would not end until 2020, as opposed to March 2019, this
    would in fact weaken the appellant's ground of appeal. Put  simply,  it
    was said that the FTT  had  erred  in  assuming  that  the  appellant's
    separation from his wife would be temporary, and that this was  key  to
    the proportionality exercise. In  fact,  as  [78]  the  Decision  makes
    clear, the FTT made no such assumption about the  temporary  nature  of
    the couple's separation. The  FTT  expressly  noted  that  it  was  not
    speculating about  the  outcome  of  a  future  application  for  entry
    clearance. What the FTT noted was that it had no evidence before it  of
    the 'Chikwamba' scenario, namely the situation where somebody was bound
    to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  in  which  case  a
    requirement for them to leave the UK and re-apply for entry  clearance,
    would very likely be disproportionate when carrying out  the  balancing
    exercise in assessing  the  proportionality  of  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain, in the context of the appellant's article  8  rights.   It  was
    unarguably open to the FTT to reach the conclusion that  there  was  no
    such evidence of a 'Chikwamba' scenario.  Mr Ali's submission that  the
    appellant's wife's studies are continuing and therefore she  could  not
    support the appellant in meeting  the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules until 2020, if he were to apply for entry  clearance,
    took the appellant further away from  the  'Chikwamba'  situation,  and
    made the respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain more, not less
    proportionate, under an article 8 assessment.

20. In relation to ground (3), while the issue of delay was  not  expressly
    referred  to  in   the   Decision,   including   in   the   appellant's
    representatives' submissions; the FTT noted the case of TZ (Pakistan) v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, which in turn deals with the issue.  The FTT
    also noted the appellant's immigration history, including his claim  of
    asylum on 18 June 2015, which was not refused until 19  November  2018;
    and the fact that the appellant had met his wife in  2017  and  he  had
    told her that he  was  an  asylum  seeker  ([22]).  The  FTT  expressly
    referred to the appellant being in a  genuine  subsisting  relationship
    with his wife who is a British citizen, and that he had been present in
    the UK  for  almost  4  years  ([70]).   The  FTT  noted  the  fact  of
    development of the appellant's family life, specifically his  marriage,
    when  assessing   factors   in   the   appellant's   favour,   in   the
    proportionality assessment at [82]. It  was  clear  that  the  FTT  had
    considered all relevant  facts  in  carrying  out  the  proportionality
    assessment, and the FTT was unarguably entitled to reach the conclusion
    it did on the proportionality assessment.

Grounds (4) to (7) - the protection appeal

21. In relation to ground (4), the FTT expressly considered  the  CPINs  of
    August 2017 (Kurdish 'honour' crimes) - [45]; and November 2018  (Iraq:
    Security and humanitarian situation) at [27]; as well  as  the  Country
    Guidance cases of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  00544  (IAC);
    AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944; and AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00212  (IAC).   The  FTT  expressly
    considered the claimed risk to the appellant  in  the  context  of  the
    background evidence. It was open  to  the  FTT  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's account did not 'fit' with available background evidence of
    the otherwise significant risk to the appellant's former  partner,  had
    the  former  partner's  family  objected  to  that  relationship.   The
    assertion in the grounds that the objective evidence indicated that the
    appellant would also be at risk, as well as  his  former  partner,  was
    consistent with  the  FTT's  findings  that  the  claimed  account  was
    fabricated, rather than supporting his claim that the relationship  had
    continued and that the couple were able to escape despite the risks  to
    them. In reality, the ground amounts to a disagreement with  the  FTT's
    findings. The FTT's findings were open to it to make  on  the  evidence
    before it and do not disclose an error of law.

22. In relation to grounds (5) and (6), they  relate  to  the  adequacy  of
    reasoning in [59] of the Decision, in which the FTT did not accept  the
    appellant's account of why he had not claimed asylum  in  Hungary;  nor
    his account of how he obtained his passport and  the  purported  arrest
    warrant against him. Whilst we accept that the  FTT's  conclusions  are
    brief in that paragraph, they must be read  in  the  context  of  other
    references in the Decision; at [50], the FTT did not  accept  that  the
    appellant's failure to claim asylum because of his claim  that  he  was
    'under the influence of an agent' while in Hungary,  was  a  reasonable
    explanation. Even then, the FTT was careful to note that any damage  to
    the appellant's credibility needed to be considered in the  round,  and
    in particular in the context of all of the evidence.  The  FTT  clearly
    considered the appellant's oral evidence at [15] that  the  appellant's
    cousin had happened to  see  the  arrest  warrant  in  the  appellant's
    family's home in a 'certain [unspecified]  place  in  the  house',  and
    'picked it up' without telling the appellant's family, and sent it  via
    unnamed third parties to the appellant.  It was  open  to  the  FTT  to
    conclude that this account did not have the 'ring of truth.'   The  FTT
    had also noted the inconsistent accounts of how the appellant  obtained
    his passport at [17], when he said that he had brought it with  him  or
    alternatively had it posted to him via an intermediary.  It was open to
    the FTT to not accept the appellant's account as credible.  Considering
    the  Decision  as  a  whole,  the  findings,  taken  in  context,  were
    adequately reasoned and do not disclose an error of law.

23. In relation ground (7), the FTT considered the Country Guidance  ('CG')
    cases in relation to internal relocation of people  of  Kurdish  origin
    within Iraq and whilst not expressly referring to the CPIN  of  October
    2018, the CG cases expressly deal with viability of return of an  Iraqi
    national of Kurdish ethnic origin to the IKR, including  the  viability
    of travel between Baghdad and the IKR with a CSID and passport. It  was
    unarguably open to the FTT to find that the appellant would be able  to
    gain entry to the IKR, noting that he has a passport; would be able  to
    obtain his CSID; would not be at risk  during  the  security  screening
    process because he had previously fought for the Kurdish Peshmerga; and
    his own account of travelling without difficulty between Iraq  and  the
    IKR.  The FTT's findings are consistent with the objective evidence and
    disclose no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  of  law,
such that the  decision  must  be  set  aside.  The  appellant's  appeal  is
dismissed.

Signed J Keith                  Date:  10 June 2019

J Keith

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
