
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14335/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21 November 2017                       |On 28 December 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                    S.G.
                                                           (Anonymity order
made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mughal
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  in  1950.   She  appeals
    against a decision by the respondent made on 22 December 2016 to refuse
    her claim for asylum.

 2. The basis of her claim is that she is at risk of persecution as she  is
    a lone woman who fears mistreatment by her son and his wife.


 3. The respondent accepted that the claim  was  capable  of  engaging  the
    Refugee Convention on the ground that she was a member of a  particular
    social group, as a lone woman in Pakistan.


 4. However, the respondent noting various discrepancies  in  her  accounts
    did not believe her claim to have been,  following  the  death  of  her
    husband,  mistreated  by  her  son  and  his  wife.   Further,  it  was
    considered that she  has  the  support  of  another  family  member,  a
    daughter in Pakistan and is financially independent.


 5. She appealed.


    First tier hearing


 6. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 27 March 2017 Judge of the First-
    Tier Eldridge dismissed the appeal.


 7. His conclusions are at paragraph 38ff.  He considered it unnecessary to
    make any findings because even taken at its highest  the  appeal  could
    not succeed under the Refugee Convention [38].


 8. He noted the appellant's  evidence  that  she  had  had  a  comfortable
    existence whilst her husband was alive.  When he died in 2009  he  left
    the family home in equal shares to his widow, a son  and  daughter  who
    live in Pakistan and two sons who live in the  UK.   However,  although
    she was supposed to live in part of the  property  and  receive  rental
    income from the other part, she was not allowed to live in the property
    and was not receiving her due rental income.  It was  unclear  how  she
    was receiving her pension.


 9. The judge considered that "even if her account is true in its entirety,
    any problems the appellant has are solvable by her sons in this country
    taking some responsibility for her plight."  They are both working  and
    there was no indication that they could not support her in Pakistan  as
    they  are  in  the  UK  [43].   If  she  chose  not  to  live  in  that
    accommodation she is entitled to  the  rental  income  and  could  live
    elsewhere, even if culturally it might be difficult or unacceptable  to
    live with her daughter in Pakistan.


10. Having noted country guidance the judge found that the appellant  would
    not be in a position to work and may have few  if  any  qualifications.
    However, "she has a pension and the right  to  rental  income  and  can
    reasonably expect to receive  additional  financial  support  from  her
    family within the UK if she needs it."  She would not need to  move  to
    the city as she lived in Islamabad [48].  He concludes (at [50]):


           "... the appellant has no well-founded fear of persecution as a
           woman in her circumstances.  Sensible action by her adult
           children in this country and her daughter in Pakistan should
           resolve her situation satisfactorily.  Even if they will not
           take that action, with the means available to her, she should be
           able to relocate within Islamabad.  The claim she brings
           suggests that it is only within the family home that she has any
           fear of ill treatment.  If her sons here remain unwilling to
           help sort out family problems and tensions, then she has no
           reason to fear such ill treatment living outside the home.  She
           has the means to support herself."


11. She sought permission to appeal which was granted on 5 September 2017.


    Error of law hearing

12. At the error of law hearing before me  Ms  Mughal  submitted  that  the
    judge erred in failing to make findings on credibility and whether  she
    fell within a particular social group and  required  protection.   Then
    having made these findings he should have considered  the  question  of
    relocation if necessary.  His approach of  stating  that  even  if  her
    account is true in its entirety any problems she has  are  solvable  by
    her sons in the UK taking some responsibility for  her  situation,  was
    inadequate.  Further, the conclusion that even if they did not help her
    she has the means to support herself was not an accurate reflection  of
    the evidence; she has no access to the rental income or to the pension,
    both of which are controlled by the  son  in  Pakistan.   As  such  the
    conclusion that she could relocate was flawed.


13. Ms Aboni simply adopted the rule 24 response.   Whilst  it  might  have
    been more appropriate for the judge to have made  credibility  findings
    his approach of taking the account at its highest was open to  him  and
    his conclusion that her financial circumstances were such that internal
    relocation was reasonable was adequate.


    Consideration


14. In considering this matter the judge's position is that even if  wholly
    true the claim cannot succeed under the Refugee Convention.  Proceeding
    on the basis that even if she is a member of a particular social  group
    who had been the victim of domestic violence at the hands of family and
    there was no sufficiency of protection  she  could  live  elsewhere  in
    Islamabad.  Even if not financially supported in  Pakistan  by  her  UK
    based family she has the means to do so herself.


15. The difficulty in my view is that in his brief conclusions the analysis
    of internal relocation is inadequate.


16. In SSHD v AH (Sudan) and  Others  [2007]  UKHL49  the  House  of  Lords
    pointed out that the test to determine whether internal relocation  was
    available was the test set out in Januzi v SSHD  [2006]  UKHL5,  namely
    that the decision maker should decide whether, taking  account  of  all
    relevant circumstances pertaining to the claimant and her  country,  it
    would be reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate  or  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect her to do so.   The  test  was  one  of
    great generality.  In applying the test enquiry had to be  directed  to
    the situation of the particular claimant; very little was excluded from
    consideration other than the standard  of  rights  protection  which  a
    claimant would enjoy in the country where refuge was sought.


17. The court said that all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  had  to  be
    assessed   holistically,   with   specific   reference   to    personal
    circumstances including past persecution or fear thereof, psychological
    or health  conditions,  family  and  social  situations,  and  survival
    capacities,  in  the  context  of  the  conditions  in  the  place   of
    relocation, including basic human rights, security and  socio  economic
    conditions and access to health care facilities; all  with  a  view  to
    determining the impact on the claimant  of  settling  in  the  proposed
    place of relocation and whether she could live a relatively normal life
    without undue hardship.


18. Further guidance was given in  SM  and  MH  (lone  women  -  ostracism)
    Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067.


19. The difficulty with the judge's assessment of  internal  relocation  is
    that it concentrated almost entirely on the financial circumstances  of
    the appellant emphasising repeatedly (at [43, 48 and 50]  that  her  UK
    based family could support her.  This is despite there being no finding
    that they would be able and willing to do so.  A default  finding  that
    were the family here not willing to help she has the means  to  support
    herself was not what the evidence indicated.  Her position was that she
    was not getting the rental income she was  entitled  to.   The  judge's
    findings on her pension are unclear.  Ms Mughal (who  appeared  at  the
    First tier hearing) indicated that the evidence had been that it,  too,
    was controlled by her son and she does not receive it.


20. Apart from the comments on the finances the judge's analysis in respect
    of internal relocation is sparse.  He notes that she is  elderly,  that
    she is not going to be in a position to get work and may  have  few  if
    any qualifications, factors, it might be thought, in her favour in  the
    assessment exercise.  He gives no  consideration  in  this  context  of
    whether she has been a victim of persistent  and  serious  mistreatment
    and her fear of such, nor on  her  health  problems  (which  the  judge
    referred to elsewhere (at [53-55]) and access to  health  care,  or  to
    issues of security, or to social and cultural difficulties that she may
    face as an elderly lone woman in Pakistan.


21. In my judgement the findings on internal  relocation  are  inadequately
    reasoned such as to amount to a material error  of  law  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside and the case to be heard afresh.


22. Whilst judicial economy is commendable it may be  appropriate  for  the
    next Tribunal to take a more structured approach and to deal  with  all
    the major issues before it, including making findings  in  relation  to
    credibility.


Notice of Decision


23. The making of the decision of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.  None
    of its findings are to stand.

24. The appeal is remitted to the First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to  section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2 before any Judge  apart
    from Judge Eldridge.


    Anonymity


    Unless or until a court or tribunal directs  otherwise,  no  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
    or any member of her family. This direction applies  to  the  appellant
    and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction  may  lead
    to contempt of court proceedings.









Signed                                             Date 22 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway






