
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa141652016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 July 2017                           |On 28 July 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Slatter, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge  Baldwin,  promulgated  on  2  May  2017,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to grant asylum.
  2. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "The second and weightier ground is that the judge,  having  found  the
     appellant was homosexual, was arguably wrong to conclude that he  would
     not be at risk on return due to his preference for behaving discreetly.
      As the grounds point out  it  may  be  that  the  appellant's  written
     evidence that he has been open about his  sexuality  here  and  how  he
     would wish to conduct himself in Pakistan but for fear of ill-treatment
     was unchallenged.  It is also arguable that the Judge  failed  to  deal
     appropriately with  the  appellant's  practice  of  casual  sex  -  see
     paragraph 11 and 12 of the grounds.  On the basis of what  is  said  in
     the second ground it seems to me that the judge may have erred in law."


  4. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
     announced that I found the decision involved the making of  a  material
     error of law and that my full reasons would follow.  I  stated  that  I
     would remake the decision.


Error of law decision


  5. I will first consider Ground 2.  The judge found that the Appellant was
     homosexual [29].  Having concluded this he then states:


     "The questions which fall to be addressed  are  whether  the  Appellant
     would openly live as a homosexual in Pakistan and, if he would not, why
     he would not do so.  In order to address this question it is  necessary
     firstly to consider to what extent the  Appellant  is  open  about  his
     sexuality in the UK where he has now lived for over a decade and  where
     very large numbers of homosexuals do live openly."


  6. The judge then goes  on  in  [30]  to  consider  the  evidence  of  the
     Appellant and Mr. M.  At the end of [30] he makes a finding that it  is
     unlikely that Mr. M conducts his homosexual life openly.  The  need  to
     make a finding that Mr. M did not conduct his homosexual life openly is
     not entirely clear, especially given the  nature  of  his  relationship
     with the Appellant.  Indeed the judge states that "The fact that Mr. M.
     is probably not openly homosexual does not of course  necessarily  mean
     that the Appellant is not openly homosexual, an issue to  which  I  now
     turn."


  7. Especially  given  the  acknowledged  reluctance  of  Mr.  M.  to  give
     evidence, as set out by the judge at [28], and having  found  that  Mr.
     M.s' evidence "removes the shadow of doubt" concerning the  Appellant's
     homosexuality, I find that to make findings about the way in which  Mr.
     M. leads his life  was  not  necessary.   The  issue  was  whether  the
     Appellant wished to live an  openly  gay  lifestyle  in  Pakistan,  not
     whether an individual with whom he had had a casual sexual relationship
     was open about his homosexuality.


  8. At [31] the judge states:


     "It is clear that fuller degrees of sexual intimacy have been practised
     in the open air but practising openly is not the same thing  as  having
     sex in the open air in woodland."


  9. The judge has accepted that the Appellant goes to meet men in order  to
     have casual sex in the open air.  These men include Mr. M.   He  refers
     to woodland near Snaresbrook and Epping Forest [30].  Neither of  these
     are private spaces.  However he finds that seeking these encounters  is
     not the same as practising his homosexuality openly.  He has failed  to
     explain how seeking casual sexual encounters in a public place  is  not
     being open about one's homosexuality and living  an  openly  homosexual
     lifestyle.  I find that the judge has failed to give  reasons  for  his
     finding that the Appellant's having sex in the open  air  in  a  public
     place does not equate to practising homosexuality openly.


 10. In the same paragraph the judge states:


     "Furthermore, if he wants to be openly homosexual it is strange that he
     makes no mention of having gone to Gay  Clubs/Pubs/Parties  during  his
     decade in the UK, particularly during the years when he was working".


 11. Ground 3 refers  to  the  Appellant  having  provided  a  supplementary
     bundle.  There  was  evidence  that  it  was  filed  and  served.   The
     Appellant adopted the contents of his supplementary  witness  statement
     at the hearing.  However, in paragraph 8, when setting out the evidence
     before him, the judge has not referred  at  all  to  the  supplementary
     bundle.


 12. Paragraph 7 of the supplementary witness statement states:


     "By comparison, in the UK,  I  can  have  casual  sex  and  go  to  gay
     bars/parties if I wanted to.  There is usually a meet up every  weekend
     where lots of gay men gather and we party.  This happens at [Lea Bridge
     Road, E17].  It is easy for me to approach men  and  be  open  to  them
     about my sexual preferences and identity."


 13. I find that  there  was  clear  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
     Appellant goes to gay bars and parties, but the judge has  stated  that
     there is no such evidence.  I find  that  the  evidence  of  practising
     casual sex in public places, and the evidence of attending gay bars and
     parties, are two pieces of clear evidence of the Appellant  living  his
     life openly as a homosexual.


 14. At the end of paragraph 31 the judge states:


     "I find that the Appellant has not proved he ever  had  a  longstanding
     partner with whom he conducted an openly homosexual relationship."


 15. It is not necessary for the Appellant to show this.   It  is  perfectly
     possible to live an  openly  gay,  or  indeed  heterosexual,  lifestyle
     without ever having a longstanding relationship.


16. In paragraph 32 the judge states that the Appellant's "desire  to  have
    casual sex is not manifested here  openly".    This  appears  to  be  a
    finding that the Appellant has a desire to have casual sex, which  does
    not sit easily with a desire to live a discreet gay lifestyle.  He then
    states that the Appellant's desire to  have  casual  sex  is  practised
    "behind  closed  doors  or  in  woodland".   He  finds  that  this   is
    "practising discreetly" but he has again failed  to  give  reasons  for
    this.


17. The Appellant's evidence of wishing to live his life as an  openly  gay
    man was not challenged.  The evidence before the  judge  was  that  the
    Appellant lived an openly gay lifestyle here.  The errors of law in the
    treatment of the evidence mean that the  judge's  assessment  under  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 is therefore flawed.


18. Ground 1 submits that the judge has failed to make findings  about  the
    Appellant's treatment in Pakistan.  In paragraph 32, having  considered
    the behaviour of the Appellant in the United Kingdom, the judge states:


    "This is in essence no different to what he did in Pakistan,  the  only
    exception being when he was raped and sexually abused by older boys".


19. The judge appears to accept the evidence that the  Appellant  has  been
    raped and sexually abused by  older  boys  in  the  past  in  Pakistan.
    However, this is the extent of the  consideration,  and  there  are  no
    further findings regarding this mistreatment in Pakistan.


20. I was referred by Mr. Slatter to the Respondent's  Country  Information
    and Guidance Pakistan, Sexual Orientation and  Gender  Identity,  April
    2016, (the "CIG") paragraph  7.1.4.   This  quotes  an  IGLHRC  advisor
    (International Gay and Lesbian  Human  Rights  Commission  advisor)  as
    follows:


    "The IGLHRC advisor added that gang violence against people who  appear
    to be gay or transgender was common.  He  explained  that  in  the  gay
    cruising areas of Islamabad, Karachi and  Lahore,  gay  or  transgender
    people were frequently lured into cars and taken  to  groups  who  beat
    and/or raped them.  According to the IGLHRC there were three  cases  in
    2014 in which men were picked up in the gay cruising  areas  in  Lahore
    and then killed."


21. This is consistent with the Appellant's evidence of  what  happened  to
    him in Pakistan, that he was raped and sexually abused by  older  boys.
    The judge has not considered the Appellant's evidence of what  happened
    to him in Pakistan.  I find that this  is  a  material  error  of  law,
    especially given its relevance to risk on return.


22. I find that the judge has made material errors in  law  in  failing  to
    make findings on a material matter, failing to  give  adequate  reasons
    for his findings, and failing to take into account evidence  which  was
    before him.  The Appellant's evidence was that he wished  to  live  his
    life as an openly gay man, and the judge has failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for why he has rejected this.


Remaking


23. I do not intend to repeat all that is set out  above.    I  have  taken
    into account the case of HJ (Iran).


24. I find that the Appellant is gay.  I find that he lives an  openly  gay
    lifestyle in the  United  Kingdom,  both  in  attending  gay  bars  and
    parties, and also by seeking casual  sexual  encounters  in  public  at
    "cruising locations".


25. I find that  the  Appellant's  evidence  as  set  out  in  his  witness
    statement is that  he  wishes  to  live  an  openly  gay  lifestyle  in
    Pakistan.  The Appellant said "I do not want to live a secret life.   I
    am an open gay man here and have any sort of relationship I desire with
    men.  I could not do this in Pakistan" [38].  I  have  found  that  the
    Appellant lives an openly gay lifestyle here, which is consistent  with
    this statement, and given that he lives an openly gay lifestyle in  the
    United Kingdom, there is nothing inconsistent about wanting to be  able
    to do the same in Pakistan.


26. I find that the only  reason  that  the  Appellant  would  conceal  his
    sexuality would be through fear of persecution.  In  his  supplementary
    witness statement  he  said  that  he  would  live  discreetly  because
    Pakistan "does not allow gay men to live openly and be safe" [6].


27. The Appellant has already suffered sexual violence in Pakistan.  He has
    been raped and sexually abused by older boys, although  clear  findings
    were not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  the  absence  of  any
    challenge, I find as a fact that the Appellant was raped  and  sexually
    abused in Pakistan.  This is consistent with  the  background  evidence
    set out above [20].  He stated in his supplementary  witness  statement
    that he would struggle to openly practise his sexuality even if it were
    allowed in Pakistan due to what he had already experienced  there  [7].
    I find that this is further evidence that he would only be discreet due
    to fear of what might happen to him based on what has already occurred.




28. The policy summary in the CIG states as follows:


    "There is widespread and systematic state and  societal  discrimination
    against LGBT persons in Pakistan, including  harassment  and  violence.
    This treatment may, in individual cases, amount  to  persecution  or  a
    risk of serious harm.  No  effective  protection  is  provided  by  the
    authorities." [3.1.2]


29. In relation to protection, paragraphs 2.4.1 and 2.42 of the CIG state:


    "Where the person's fear is of ill treatment/persecution at  the  hands
    of the state, they  will  not  be  able  to  avail  themselves  of  the
    protection of the authorities.


    If the person's  fear  is  of  ill-treatment/persecution  by  non-state
    actors an LGBT person will not be  able  to  avail  themselves  to  the
    protection of the authorities. This is because same-sex sexual acts are
    prohibited in Pakistan, and it would be unreasonable to expect a person
    identifying as LGBT, who fears persecution or serious harm by non-state
    actors  because  of  their  sexuality,  to  seek  protection  from  the
    authorities because they may in doing so be  at  risk  of  prosecution,
    persecution or serious harm."


30. In relation to internal relocation, paragraphs 2.5.1 to 2.5.3 state:


    "Where the person's fear is of ill treatment/persecution at  the  hands
    of the state, they will not be able to relocate to escape that risk.


    Decision makers must also take account that the Supreme  Court  in  the
    case of HJ (Iran) made the point that internal relocation  is  not  the
    answer if it depends on the person concealing their sexual  orientation
    in the proposed new location for fear of persecution.


    With regard to those in fear of non state actors, given that homophobic
    attitudes are prevalent throughout the country, there is unlikely to be
    any place in Pakistan to which an LGBT person who would  be  identified
    as such could safely relocate. However, if  the  person  would  not  be
    identified as LGBT in a different location internal relocation  may  be
    viable."


31. The Appellant said in his supplementary witness statement that he would
    not be safe in his village as "people  are  narrow  minded".   He  said
    wherever he went in Pakistan he would be in danger living openly  as  a
    gay man [6].  I find that this is supported  by  the  Respondent's  own
    guidance.


32. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the Appellant,  as  a
    gay man who lives an openly gay lifestyle now, and who wants to live as
    an openly gay man on return to Pakistan, and who  has  previously  been
    raped and suffered sexual abuse in Pakistan, would be at risk on return
    to Pakistan on account of his sexuality.  There is  no  sufficiency  of
    protection, and he would not be able to internally relocate.



33. I find that the Appellant has demonstrated that there is  a  real  risk
    that he will suffer persecution on return to Pakistan, and so his claim
    succeeds on asylum grounds.  Following my finding in  relation  to  his
    asylum claim, I find that  he  would  also  be  at  risk  of  treatment
    contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR such  as  to  put  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of its obligations.  The  appeal  is  therefore  also
    allowed on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision


34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of material
    errors of law and I set the decision aside.


35. I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 27 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal.  I have considered making a fee award  if  a  fee
has been paid or is payable.  Further evidence was provided for the  appeal.
 In the circumstances I do not make a fee award.


Signed                                  Date 27 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
