
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/14017/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       |      Decision and Reasons         |
|                                        |Promulgated                        |
|On 27th March 2018                      |      On 11th April 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL KELLY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [M T]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Ahmad, Counsel instructed by Malik and Malik
Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of Judge K Henderson, promulgated on the 19th June
    2017,  whereby  she  allowed  the  appeal  against  refusal  of  [MT]'s
    Protection Claim. For convenience, I shall  refer  to  the  parties  in
    accordance with their status in the First-tier Tribunal. I  shall  thus
    refer to [MT] as "the appellant" and to the Secretary of State as  "the
    respondent".

 2. The appellant's case may conveniently be summarised as follows.

 3. The Appellant hails from a village in northern Albania called  [M].  In
    June 2013 she met a man called [FR] at a friend's birthday party.  They
    began to see one another regularly until [FR] left for Sweden on the  [
    ] 2013. They thereafter maintained contact by telephone.  On  the  [  ]
    2014, the Appellant went for a family visit to Italy where  her  sister
    and two brothers were living. A month later she went  to  Sweden  where
    [FR] said he was working for a construction company. He met her at  the
    airport and she went to stay with him at  his  apartment.  Three  weeks
    later, [FR] told her that henceforth she would be working for him as  a
    prostitute. He held her captive, monitored  her  telephone  calls,  and
    assaulted and raped her when she refused to work as  a  prostitute.  He
    became angry when he discovered that she was pregnant and he threatened
    to kill her family members if she attempted to escape. She rang one  of
    her brothers in Italy ([D]) whilst [FR] was sleeping and explained  her
    plight. A week later, whilst [FR] was again  sleeping,  [D]  telephoned
    and informed her that he had found an agent to take her to England. The
    next day, the Appellant escaped from the apartment and  telephoned  the
    number of the agent that  [D]  had  arranged  for  her  and  thereafter
    travelled by lorry to the United Kingdom where she claimed asylum.  She
    gave birth to a boy on the 23rd  August  2015.  She  has  not  had  any
    further contact with either [FR] or [D] since leaving Sweden. She fears
    that on return to Albania she will be shunned by her family and society
    at large because she has given birth to a child  outside  wedlock,  and
    that her father would seek her out were  she  to  relocate  within  her
    country of origin. She is diagnosed as  suffering  from  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and has  been  referred  to  rape  counselling  by  her
    General Practitioner in the UK.

 4. The respondent's case was (and is) that even if  the  appellant's  core
    account is credible, she could nevertheless reasonably be  expected  to
    relocate to a place within Albania (such as  Tirana)  where  the  state
    authorities would provide her with sufficient  protection  against  her
    father.  The judge's conclusion is to be found at paragraph 67  of  her
    decision:

         "The appellant has shown that the core of her account  is  credible
         and that she has a well-founded fear of persecution  on  the  basis
         that she is a woman who has been trafficked  for  the  purposes  of
         sexual exploitation. I accept that  she  faces  a  real  risk  [of]
         serious harm and treatment contrary to Article 3 of the  ECHR.  Her
         mental vulnerability, her lack of familial  support,  her  lack  of
         employment experience and the very  young  age  of  her  child  are
         factors which to me would affect her ability  to  relocate  and  to
         reintegrate. For the reasons I  have  given  I  conclude  that  the
         Appellant  can  also  show  that  she  meets  the  requirements  of
         Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as there are very significant obstacles  to
         her integration in Albania."

 5. The respondent's grounds argue that the judge  made  contradictory  and
    therefore irrational findings of fact in reaching that  conclusion.  It
    is argued, in particular, that at paragraph 49  of  her  decision,  the
    judge found that the appellant  "had  not  been  straightforward  about
    direct contact with her father or direct threats from him" and  yet  at
    paragraph 51 had gone on  to  find  that  her  claimed  fear  of  being
    subjected to domestic abuse "perpetrated by parents, siblings and other
    relatives" was well-founded. At the hearing, Mrs  Pettersen  also  drew
    attention to the judge's finding, at paragraph 50, that  the  appellant
    had not been straightforward about her claimed lack of current  contact
    with her brother [D] (who had financed  her  escape  from  the  abusive
    relationship in Sweden) or with "other relatives in Italy", and yet  at
    paragraph 51 had suggested that it was "unclear  how  much  support  he
    would be willing to give to her should she  be  returned  by  Albania".
    In reply, Ms Ahmad drew my attention to other passages in the  decision
    whereby the judge appeared unconditionally to  accept  the  appellant's
    claim that she had been (a) threatened by her father, and (b) would not
    receive support from her family members in either Italy or Albania upon
    returning to the latter country (paragraphs 57  and  66  for  example).
    However, in my view  those  passages  merely  serve  to  emphasise  the
    general confusion in the judge's reasoning  concerning  these  discrete
    matters. On one view of the judge's findings, she had  disbelieved  the
    appellant in relation to both them. At best, it is unclear whether  she
    accepted the appellant's evidence about them or not. Both matters  were
    clearly critical to the outcome of the appeal.

 6.  I  therefore  hold  that  the  judge's  reasoning  was  inadequate.  I
    accordingly set aside her decision as infected by a material  error  of
    law.

 7. I discussed  with  the  representatives  whether  it  was  possible  to
    preserve the judge's findings of fact in relation to the  circumstances
    leading to  the  appellant  travelling  to  Sweden  together  with  her
    experiences in and flight from that country. I am persuaded that  those
    findings are not directly tainted by the errors made by Judge Henderson
    in relation to the threats that the appellant claims to  have  received
    from her father and/or the  claimed  lack  of  support  that  would  be
    available  to  her  from  other  family  members  on  return.  I   have
    nevertheless concluded that it would be difficult to express to another
    judge who may be tasked with re-making the decision  as  to  where  the
    line is to be drawn between those factual findings which are  preserved
    and those which are set aside. I  have  therefore  concluded  that  the
    sensible course would be to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal
    where I shall hear it afresh. Although I do not  specifically  preserve
    any of Judge Henderson's findings, the parties will  have  noted  those
    aspects of the appellant's account which I anticipate will be the focus
    of their evidence and submissions. Should either party wish  to  submit
    further evidence, then this must done not less than five  working  days
    before the hearing.



Notice of Decision

 8. The appeal is allowed.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to be heard afresh by Judge Kelly in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed   Date: 7th April 2018

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
