

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: PA/14309/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on    01.11.2017                      |on  07.11.2017                       |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                Saiful EHSAN
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr James Howard, solicitor, Fountain, Walsall
For the respondent: Mr Lawrence Tarlow

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Manjit Kaur Obhi), sitting at Birmingham on 31 January,
    to  an asylum and human rights appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh,  born
    1990. The Home Office had appealed, and  the  first-tier  decision  had
    been set aside: the deputy judge had gone on, apparently without notice
    to the parties, to make a fresh decision on the appeal. This had led to
    an application for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal,  which
    was treated by Judge Devinder Kaur Gill  under  rr.  43  &  48  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as an application to set
    aside the deputy judge's decision.

 2. Judge Gill upheld the deputy judge's decision to set aside  the  first-
    tier decision; but set aside her decision to dismiss  the  appeal.  She
    directed that it should be re-listed before the same deputy judge  (but
    there has been an order for transfer), who might decide  to  limit  the
    hearing to deciding whether the appeal should be allowed or  dismissed,
    on the basis of the reasoning and findings  of  fact  which  appear  at
    paragraphs 1 - 31 of the first-tier decision.

HISTORY

 3. With the agreement of both sides, I took those paragraphs as the  basis
    for my own decision, together with concise further  submissions  before
    me. Since the judge's treatment of the appellant's account was a little
    diffuse, it was helpful to have Mr Howard's summary of it, as  well  as
    the one in the refusal letter. However, as  the  judge  comprehensively
    rejected it, for reasons she gave, I can take it fairly shortly.

 4. The appellant said he had become involved in politics as  a  member  of
    the Chatro Shibir, or student wing of the  Jamaat  e-Islami  party,  in
    opposition to the governing Awami League. He mentioned an  incident  in
    2007, as a result of which his father had told him  to  concentrate  on
    his studies, and in due course sent him to this country, with a student
    visa issued at the end of 2009, to  pursue  them.  In  early  2010  the
    appellant arrived here, and eventually had leave to remain as a student
    till 21 December 2015. Meanwhile in 2012 he made a short visit home, to
    which I shall return.

 5. In December 2015, before the appellant's leave ran out, he travelled to
    Letterkenny (Co, Donegal, in the Republic of Ireland), and stayed there
    till June 2016. On the 12th he arrived in Belfast by coach, to catch  a
    ferry over to Scotland; but, as the stamp on his passport had run  out,
    he was detained and on the 17th given removal directions for the  21st.
    It was not till after that that he claimed asylum for the  first  time;
    not surprisingly, his failure to do  so  before  (see  s.8  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004)  was  among  the
    judge's reasons for disbelieving him.

 6. The appellant said he had returned to Bangladesh in 2012 (from February
    to April, as he eventually made clear) to look for his father, who  was
    reported to have disappeared. In the  course  of  this  quest,  he  had
    phoned people who later gave his number to Awami League members. Later,
    on his return to this country, two men from the Awami League  had  rung
    him  on  his  mobile  here,  and  taunted  him   about   his   father's
    disappearance, threatening to deal with him in the same way. It is  not
    clear from the papers when he got this call; but it evidently  did  not
    lead him to claim asylum, not only till after his student leave had run
    out, but after his six months in the Republic  of  Ireland,  and  at  a
    point where he had already been given removal directions.

ARGUMENT

 7. Mr Howard suggested that the judge had found that this appellant was  a
    supporter of the Chatro Shibir  of  the  Jamaat  e-Islami;  but,  as  I
    pointed out, the last sentence of her paragraph 23 is to the  contrary:
    "The appellant has no profile, even if [my emphasis] I accepted that he
    was a supporter of the Jamaat student wing in his student days and that
    his father was a member of the party now". The judge however  had  gone
    on at paragraph 25 comprehensively to reject the appellant's account.

 8. Mr Howard went on to refer me to the Bangladesh section  of  the  Human
    Rights Watch World Report for 2015/16. At p 3/12 there is the following
    item:

       The opposition  Jamaat  e-Islami  party  claims  its  activists  were
       arrested and tortured by the police, including its Detective  Branch,
       and  says  several  members  were  killed  by  security  forces.  For
       instance, witnesses saw the police arrest Ahmadullah, a  22-year  old
       student supporter of the party, on January 31 [presumably  2016]  his
       body was found the next morning.  The  police  claimed  that  he  was
       killed in crossfire between security forces and Jamaat supporters.

 9. Next Mr Howard referred me to the Home Office country  information  and
    guidance of February 2015: at p  25/26,  referring  to  the  Jamaat  e-
    Islami, the report says "The party faces an  existential  threat  under
    the AL [Awami League] government, which is  pushing  for  its  complete
    political ban".

CONCLUSIONS

10. There is, perhaps unfortunately, no relevant current  country  guidance
    from the Tribunal on Bangladesh. However, even there were  evidence  to
    show any general Convention risk for members of the Jamaat e-Islami, or
    its student wing, either from supporters of the  Awami  League  or  the
    security forces, which there is not, the judge not  only  rejected  the
    appellant's claimed history, but expressly found  he  had  no  relevant
    profile. There is no basis for any reasonable likelihood of  Convention
    persecution or ill-treatment in this case, and the appeal is dismissed.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                               Decision signed:   05.11.2017
