

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/14220/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |      Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|on 27 September 2017                  |      on 25 October 2017        |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     H K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G McGowan, Quinn, Martin & Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal MacKenzie dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.


   2. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the grounds
      that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in her assessment of
      the evidence, particularly in relation to evidence of the appellant's
      religious activities.

   3. The appellant is a forty-year-old Iranian national.  He entered the UK
      in 2009 and claimed asylum on the grounds of political opinion.  This
      claim was refused and a subsequent appeal was dismissed.  In 2014 the
      appellant made further submissions on the basis of his claim to have
      converted to Christianity.  A further refusal decision was issued in
      December 2016 and it is against this decision which this appeal was
      brought.

   4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant
      himself, from an Iranian friend of the appellant who was recognised as
      a refugee on the grounds of his conversion to Christianity, and from a
      Christian minister, Rev W.  Early in her assessment of the evidence
      the judge stated that as the appellant' s evidence in his previous
      appeal had not been found to be truthful, the appellant's credibility
      was low.  The judge did not accept that the appellant was a genuine
      convert and did not consider that the evidence of Rev Weddell altered
      this assessment.


Submissions

   5. At the hearing before me Mr McGowan referred to comments made by the
      judge at paragraph 13 of the decision.  Here the judge recorded the
      appellant's response when it was put to him that he had lied at his
      previous appeal hearing.  The appellant stated that he was frightened
      as his agent had told him he had to say certain things or he would be
      returned to Iran and punished.  At paragraph 49, in making her
      findings, the judge stated that the appellant's "explanation that he
      was found to have lied at the previous appeal because his former agent
      had told him to 'say certain things or he would be returned to Iran'
      was wholly incredible..."  There were no specific reasons given to
      support this finding.


   6. Mr McGowan continued that at paragraph 47 the judge referred to a lack
      of explanation for the appellant's conversion, but his explanation was
      set out in his witness statement, to which the judge failed to have
      regard.  At paragraphs 51 and 57 the judge dealt with the evidence
      corroborating the appellant's conversion, including the evidence of
      Rev. W, as an "add-on" that did not alter the adverse credibility
      finding the judge had already made.  Mr McGowan characterised this as
      a Mibanga type of error.

   7. Mr Matthews, for the respondent, began by referring to the appellant's
      explanation for lying at his previous hearing.  Mr Matthews sought to
      reject any suggestion that when the judge referred at paragraph 49 to
      the appellant's "former agent" she had in mind the appellant's "former
      legal agent".  The judge had properly considered new evidence in
      accordance with Devaseelan.  In relation to the appellant's
      explanation for his conversion the judge did not state at paragraph 50
      that there was no explanation but that there was no "satisfactory
      explanation".  The judge was not required to refer to every piece of
      evidence and it should not be inferred that the judge had overlooked
      the explanation in the appellant's witness statement.

   8. On the supposed Mibanga error Mr Matthews submitted that the judge had
      looked at the evidence in the round and did not reach a conclusion
      before considering the evidence.  For instance, the appellant did not
      even know the date he was baptised.  The evidence of Rev. W was taken
      into account.

   9. Mr Matthews then referred to paragraph 59 of the decision, where the
      judge stated she gave no weight to evidence that the appellant had
      been attending church and Bible classes and had been baptised.  Mr
      Matthews acknowledged that this might have been expressed better but
      read as a whole the decision showed the judge had considered all
      relevant matters.


Discussion

  10. In my view there are several problems with the judge's reasoning
      which, if considered individually might not be sufficient to show her
      findings are unsound, but taken together raise serious concern about
      the basis for her findings.  For instance, what did the judge have in
      mind when she referred to the appellant's "former agent".  It might
      well be regarded as wholly incredible, in the absence of any
      supporting evidence, for the appellant to claim that his former legal
      agent told him to say certain things.  It is much less apparent why it
      would be wholly incredible for the agent who facilitated the
      appellant's journey to the UK to have told him to say certain things.
      Those who have heard a number of appeals involving asylum or
      protection will from time to time have heard an appellant allege that
      a people smuggler, or agent, told them to say certain things.  While
      Mr Matthews made a good point about the effect of Devaseelan, Mr
      McGowan pointed out that the appellant was in the position, albeit of
      his own making, where he had either to maintain that he had told the
      truth in his previous appeal or make an admission that he had not done
      so and seek to provide an explanation.  The proffered explanation
      ought not to have been disregarded without fuller reasoning of a more
      adequate nature.


  11. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, as Mr Matthews pointed out, gave
      a number of reasons for finding that the appellant's conversion was
      not genuine.  There is a sense from reading the decision that while
      the judge was prepared to give full weight to any factors adversely
      impacting upon the alleged conversion, she was less willing to accord
      significant weight to countervailing factors suggesting that the
      conversion might be genuine, such as the appellant's religious
      activities, his knowledge of Christianity, and perhaps most
      significant of all, the evidence of Rev. W.  In this context the
      explanation provided by the appellant in his witness statement of the
      reasons for his conversion becomes important.  At paragraph 50 of the
      decision the judge comments on several responses made by the appellant
      at his asylum interview and in his oral evidence about why he
      converted but makes no mention of the fuller explanation provided by
      the appellant in his witness statement.  Mr Matthews was of course
      correct in principle to say that the judge did not need to refer to
      all the evidence, and to point out that she found that there was no
      "satisfactory explanation" for the conversion rather than no
      explanation at all.  Nevertheless, in finding there was no
      satisfactory explanation for the conversion, the judge made no
      reference at all to the explanation in the witness statement, despite
      referring in detail to what the appellant said in this regard at
      interview and in oral evidence.  It is therefore difficult to infer
      that the judge took into account the witness statement when making the
      adverse finding.


  12. Having regard to the matters set out above I am not satisfied that the
      judge gave adequate and valid reasons for the findings made.  In so
      doing the judge erred in law.  The decision is set aside and requires
      to be re-made.

  13. Prior to the hearing the appellant's solicitors wrote to the Tribunal
      to say that Rev. W would not be able to attend the hearing because of
      church commitments.  I did not consider it would be appropriate to
      make fresh findings for the purpose of re-making the decision without
      the evidence of Rev. W.  While sometimes it seems witnesses do not
      appreciate the importance of attending Tribunal hearings where a
      decision may be re-made, I recognise that a witness practising a
      profession may have other commitments from which it is difficult to
      disengage. Under the circumstances the appropriate course is for the
      appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing before
      a different judge with no findings made by Judge MacKenzie preserved.


Conclusions

  14. The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.


  15. The decision is set aside.

  16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
      with no findings made in the current appeal preserved.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  As the asylum
appeal is to be reheard I will make such a direction to preserve the
positions of the parties until the appeal is decided.  Unless or until a
court or tribunal directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall
directly or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.
This direction applies to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to
comply with this direction may lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Deputy           Upper            Tribunal            Judge            Deans
         24th October 2017



