
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14260/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 28 June 2019                 |On 02 July 2019                 |
|Prepared on 28 June 2019        |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. T.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Counsel, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Ethiopia, entered the UK  unlawfully
           on a date unknown, and made a protection claim on 31  July  2018
           which was refused on 12 December 2018.
        2. The Appellant's appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  and
           dismissed by First Tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon  in  a  decision
           promulgated on 25 March 2019. She was then granted permission to
           appeal by decision of 25 April 2019 of First tier Tribunal Judge
           Parkes for arguable failure to properly assess the  risks  faced
           by the Appellant upon return to Ethiopia as a result of her "sur
           place" activity in the UK.
        3. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      The challenge
        4. Mr Howard, who was not their author, accepted that there was  no
           arguable merit in grounds 1, 2, 3, 5, or, 6. Thus his focus  was
           upon ground 4.
        5. The Appellant's case was that she had joined PG7  whilst  living
           in the UK, paying a subscription, and participating in  some  of
           the activities organised by PG7 in the UK. Although her case was
           that these activities would already have attracted the attention
           of the Ethiopian authorities so that she would have acquired  by
           the date of the hearing an adverse political profile, this claim
           was rejected by the Judge.
        6. The Judge also compared her evidence given  at  interview,  with
           her oral evidence, and  the  written  evidence  relied  upon  as
           corroboration. His conclusion  was  that  by  the  date  of  her
           interview  the  Appellant  had  done  no  more  than  join   the
           organisation by paying a membership fee, and that she  then  had
           limited knowledge of the organisation. He went  on  to  conclude
           that she had only joined PG7 in  order  to  bolster  her  asylum
           claim;  i.e.  that  this  was  a  cynical  act  without  genuine
           political motivation [47]. His overall conclusion was  that  "at
           best" the Appellant might by the date of the hearing have had  a
           low level involvement with PG7 [52], which  was  indeed  a  fair
           reflection of her own case.
        7. These findings and conclusions are not the subject of  challenge
           in the grounds. Nor is any complaint made  over  the  conclusion
           that the Appellant had given a false account of her  experiences
           in Ethiopia so that she had not come to the adverse attention of
           the Ethiopian authorities by the date she had left that country,
           and had not been detained by them [45].
        8. Mr Howard accepts that the evidence relied upon by the Appellant
           did not suggest that the level of activity in PG7 that the Judge
           had accepted the Appellant had established "at best" by the date
           of the hearing was sufficient to have brought her to the adverse
           attention of the  Ethiopian  authorities  by  the  date  of  the
           hearing of the appeal. Certainly the grounds do not suggest that
           such evidence existed and was overlooked.
        9. Mr Howard also accepts that the grounds make no  complaint  that
           the  Judge  overlooked  any  material  evidence  concerning  the
           likelihood of a returnee from the UK  being  questioned  by  the
           Ethiopian authorities as to  the  nature  and  extent  of  their
           activities when outside Ethiopia, or  their  political  beliefs,
           either at the point of return or shortly  thereafter.  Thus  the
           evidence relied upon did not establish that either  the  process
           of documenting the Appellant to render her  return  to  Ethiopia
           feasible, or,  the  processing  of  her  physical  admission  to
           Ethiopia upon her return from the UK by air would bring  her  to
           the adverse attention of the Ethiopian authorities.
       10. It is clear that after a significant  period  outside  Ethiopia,
           and upon a forced removal from  the  UK,  the  Appellant  might,
           indeed, be perceived by the Ethiopian  authorities  as  one  who
           might have claimed asylum  in  the  UK.  However  there  was  no
           evidence placed before the Judge,  and  overlooked  by  him,  to
           suggest that this would mean that she would be questioned  about
           the nature of her failed asylum claim, and thus placed  at  real
           risk of harm in the course of that questioning, or as  a  result
           of her answers.
       11. Although ground 4 asserts a failure on the part of the Judge  to
           consider the risk to the Appellant once returned to Ethiopia  in
           the context of RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38, there is  therefore
           no foundation for either that argument, or, one  based  upon  HJ
           (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, to be found in the  Judge's  unchallenged
           adverse findings of fact. The Judge's conclusion  was  that  the
           Appellant had joined PG7 cynically in order to bolster what  was
           initially a false asylum claim; thus there was no reason for him
           to consider  what  would  happen  in  the  event  she  expressed
           political views in support of PG7 following removal to Ethiopia.
           It was a necessary consequence of his finding that she would not
           wish to do so; not out of fear of the consequences of doing  so,
           but because she did not genuinely hold such views, HJ.  Nor  did
           the evidence suggest that at any point following physical return
           to Ethiopia she would face a risk of being expected  to  express
           positive support for the regime, and of harm if she could not do
           so to the satisfaction of her inquisitors, RT.
       12. In my judgement, when the decision is read as  a  whole,  it  is
           quite clear that the  Judge's  decision  was  careful  and  well
           reasoned, that the findings he made were  open  to  him  on  the
           evidence, and, that there is no merit in the complaints advanced
           in the grounds. In the circumstances, and as  indicated  at  the
           hearing I am satisfied that the Judge  did  not  fall  into  any
           material error of law in his approach to the  evidence  when  he
           dismissed  the  appeal,  notwithstanding  the  terms  in   which
           permission to appeal was granted. In my  judgement  the  grounds
           fail to disclose any material error of law in the approach taken
           by the Judge to the evidence that requires his  decision  to  be
           set aside and remade.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 25
   March 2019 contained no material error of law in the decision to dismiss
   the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  her,  or  her
        children. This direction applies both to the Appellant and  to  the
        Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
        proceedings being brought for contempt of court.




   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 28 June 2019




