
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00005/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2019                           |On 27 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  Simon [K]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burnett instructed by Wick & Co Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision on 6 November 2017 to revoke his  refugee  status
    with reference to Section 72 of the 2002 Act.

 2. That provision creates statutory presumptions that certain offences are
    a particularly serious crime and that an individual convicted  of  such
    offences is a serious criminal,  with  a  rebuttable  presumption  (see
    section 72(6)) that he constitutes a danger to the community.  In  this
    appeal, the Secretary of State has certified the appellant's conviction
    as a crime making him a section 72 serious  criminal  and  raising  the
    statutory presumption of dangerousness against him.

 3. Section 72(10) requires the Tribunal to begin by  deliberating  whether
    the dangerousness presumption has been rebutted, before considering the
    appeal  substantively.   If  the  dangerousness  presumption   is   not
    rebutted, the appeal must be dismissed.  For the claimant,  Mr  Burrett
    accepted that he  falls  to  be  treated  under  the  serious  criminal
    provisions in section 72 but argued that  the  appellant  was  not  now
    dangerous and that the presumption should be disapplied.

 4. The First-tier  Tribunal's  reasons  for  disapplying  the  Section  72
    presumption are given at [28]-[31] of the decision:-

         "28. In giving his evidence the [claimant] impressed  as  being  an
             intelligent young  man  who  has  learnt  a  lesson.   He  has
             undertaken courses such  as  RISE  and  alcohol  awareness  to
             address issues affecting his life.  He continues to attend his
             local Christian Pentecostal Church every Sunday.   In  serving
             his  sentence  he  has  been   punished   for   committing   a
             'particularly serious crime'.  The undoubted dangerousness  of
             the offence committed on a  woman  on  her  own  at  night  in
             vulnerable circumstances cannot be underestimated.   AS  found
             by HHJ  Clark  when  sentencing  the  [claimant]  there  were,
             acknowledging that alcohol had played  a  disinhibiting  part,
             significant aggravating features falling within Category 1  of
             the Sentencing Guidelines of six to 11 years.

         29.  I am mindful of DC Look's  assessment  that  she  manages  the
             [claimant] in circumstances of him being a  low  risk  of  re-
             offending, weight is attached to the opinion  of  [claimant's]
             probation  officer,  Stephanie  Okwuadi.   Notwithstanding   a
             reduction of being of high risk to medium, the [claimant] 'has
             demonstrated he can address his offending and has shown  great
             regret and remorse for his offending behaviour'  and  that  he
             'continues  to  show  willingness  to  address  his  offending
             behaviour'.

         30.  Accordingly it has not been established that the [claimant] is
             a 'danger to the community'  in  circumstances  where  he  has
             addressed his offending behaviour and the risk of re-offending
             is low.

         31.  In all the circumstances s. 72(10) of the Act does not  apply.
             His appeal against revocation of his refugee status  succeeds.
             The consequence is that the [claimant]  is  protected  by  the
             provisions  of  Article  33  recited  above.   The  Convention
             prevents his removal from  the  UK.   In  these  circumstances
             there is no need  or  requirement  to  address  Article  3  as
             submitted by Mr Burrett."

 5. The respondent's challenge is in effect a disagreement with the factual
    findings of the First-tier Judge.  This morning at the hearing I  heard
    argument from Ms Isherwood on behalf of the respondent and I have  also
    been taken to the documents at pages 23, 35 to 36 and 37 to 69  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal bundle which is the evidence which would have  been
    before the First-tier Judge.  I  remind  myself  of  all  the  relevant
    authorities and also that I must not go behind the finding of fact by a
    First-tier Judge unless  it  is  perverse  Wednesbury  unreasonable  or
    incomprehensible to me as set out at paragraph 90 in  the  judgment  of
    Lord Justice Brooke in R (Iran) v The Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

 6. The finding made by this judge on these facts is none  of  those.   The
    evidence is that the claimant, as he  was  below,  committed  a  single
    serious  offence  while  intoxicated  and  that  he  has  taken   every
    opportunity that was offered to him for rehabilitation.  On that  basis
    it was open to the judge to find that the claimant now  no  longer  met
    the dangerousness test and to  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  for  the
    reasons he gave.

DECISION

7.   For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     22 November 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson




