
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber  Appeal number: RP/00154/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 14 August 2019                   |11 February 2020                     |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

                                     AM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                                  Anonymity
I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

I make this order because this is a protection claim.

The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr K Smyth of Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer



                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant, a national of Somalia born on 5  January  1974,  appeals
    against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M A Khan  who,
    in a determination promulgated on 23 April 2019, dismissed  his  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent of 25 September 2018.

 2. The appellant is from the Reer Hamar minority clan. He claims  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 15 February 2001.  He  came
    to the attention of the United Kingdom authorities on 19 February  2001
    at which time he claimed asylum. On 4 April 2001, he was granted asylum
    and indefinite leave to remain.

 3. In the decision letter dated 25 September 2018, the respondent  decided
    to cease the appellant's refugee status. Having applied  the  cessation
    provisions, the respondent decided that the presumptions in s.72 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  applied,  i.e.  that  the
    appellant had been convicted of a particularly serious crime  and  that
    he presented a danger to the  community  of  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    respondent also concluded that the appellant's removal would not be  in
    breach of his rights under Articles 2, 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

 4.  The  respondent  decided  to  cease  the  appellant's  refugee  status
    following his conviction on 12 January 2016 at Wood Green  Crown  Court
    of an offence of robbery  in respect of which he was  sentenced  on  13
    January 2016 to a four years' imprisonment.

 5. Before the cessation decision was taken by the  respondent,  the  UNHCR
    was  invited  to  make  representations  concerning  the   respondent's
    intention to cease the appellant's refugee status. By a letter dated  9
    February 2018 (the "UNHCR letter"), the UNHCR  stated  that  "cessation
    under Article 1C(5) was not considered appropriate". In its letter, the
    UNHCR relied upon evidence that post-dated the country guidance in  MOJ
    & Others (return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).

 6. Para 339A of the Immigration Rules provides, insofar  as  relevant,  as
    follows:

         Refugee Convention ceases to apply (cessation)

         339A.  This paragraph  applies  when  the  Secretary  of  State  is
         satisfied that one or more of the following applies:

         (i)  ...;

         (ii) ...;

         (iii)    ...;

         (iv) ...;

         (v)  they can no longer, because the  circumstances  in  connection
         with which they have been recognised as a refugee  have  ceased  to
         exist, continue to refuse to avail themselves of the protection  of
         the country of nationality; or

         (vi) ...

         In considering (v) and (vi), the  Secretary  of  State  shall  have
         regard to  whether  the  change  of  circumstances  is  of  such  a
         significant and non-temporary nature that  the  refugee's  fear  of
         persecution can no longer be regarded as well-founded.

 7. There are three grounds:

         (i)  Ground 1: that the judge failed to  consider  para  339A,  the
         burden of proof being on the respondent to show that there had been
         a significant and non-temporary change in the circumstances.

         (ii) Ground 2: that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  the
         evidence relied upon by the UNHCR in its letter justified departing
         from the country guidance  in  MOJ,  stating  at  para  56  of  his
         decision, stating at para 56 that  he  had  "considered  the  UNHCR
         reports in light of the findings in the case of MOJ and come to the
         conclusion  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had   all   the   necessary
         information before it to come to the result it  did  in  its  finds
         [sic]".

         (iii)    Ground 3: That the judge erred  in  reaching  his  finding
         that the appellant's mother was in Somalia. This finding was  based
         on a single sentence in  the  appellant's  OASys  assessment  which
         stated: "He stated ... that his mother still lives in  Somalia  who
         he speaks to on the phone from time to time". The judge  had  erred
         by failing to consider the possibility of an error on the  part  of
         the author of the OASys assessment.

 8. At the hearing, I indicated my preliminary view on  grounds  1  and  2,
    saying that it seemed to me that:

         (i)  The judge  appeared  not  to  have  considered  the  cessation
         provisions, as it appeared that he considered  that  the  cessation
         provisions were to be equated with the question whether there was a
         real risk of the appellant being persecuted in Somalia.

         (ii) The judge appeared not to have considered whether the evidence
         referred to in the UNHCR  letter,  which  evidence  post-dated  the
         country guidance case of MOJ, justified departing from the  country
         guidance in MOJ

 9. Mr Kotas initially submitted that any error in relation  to  grounds  1
    and 2 was not material because any  judge  who  assessed  the  evidence
    relied upon by the UNHCR in the UNHCR letter would have concluded  that
    the cessation provisions  applied.  However,  as  I  indicated  at  the
    hearing, the fact was that there was no reasoning at all in the judge's
    decision of the evidence in the UNHCR letter  from  which  it  followed
    that I would have to conduct the assessment myself in order to conclude
    that the judge's errors were not material. I informed Mr Kotas  that  I
    was willing to hear his submissions and decide the appeal if  he  still
    considered that  the  judge's  decision  could  stand.  Mr  Kotas  then
    informed me that he did not wish to try and persuade me to depart  from
    my preliminary view on grounds 1 and 2.

10. I have concluded that the judge did err in law as contended in  grounds
    1 and 2. I am satisfied that his errors were material to the outcome.

11. In addition, if the judge had come to the conclusion that the cessation
    provisions applied, he should have proceeded to  consider  whether  the
    appellant had rebutted the  two  presumptions  in  s.72.  There  is  no
    mention of s.72 at all in his  decision  notwithstanding  that  it  was
    plainly raised in the decision letter. If he had considered the  matter
    and concluded that the presumptions in s.72 had been rebutted, then  he
    would have had to consider whether the appellant  had  established  his
    asylum claim and humanitarian protection claims and  his  claims  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR. If he had concluded that the presumptions
    in s.72 had not been rebutted, then  he  would  have  had  to  consider
    whether the appellant had established his claims under Articles 2 and 3
    of the ECHR.

12. It is clear from what I have said above that there has been a wholesale
    failure by the judge to engage with most of the material issues in this
    case in any way.

13. For the reasons given above, I set aside the decision of the judge.

14. The next issue concerns the ambit of the re-making of the  decision  on
    the appellant's appeal. Ground 3 is relevant to this issue.

15. On this subject, the judge said, at para 43, as follows:

         "At page 19 of the appellant's bundle, at 6.10,  the  OASys  report
         states that the appellant reported that his mother still  lives  in
         Somalia, who he speaks to on the phone from time to time.  However,
         in his written statement and his evidence at  the  hearing  before,
         the appellant stated that his mother and sister live in  a  refugee
         camp in Nairobi, in Kenya and he did not provide the information to
         the Probation about his mother living in Somalia. If the  appellant
         did not provide the writer of the report with  the  whereabouts  of
         his mother, then how did this information come to attention of  the
         Probation? I find that the appellant is the only person  who  could
         have provided this information and his mother is actually living in
         Somalia and not in Kenya as claimed."

16. Mr Kotas submitted that the judge was plainly aware of the  appellant's
    evidence that he had not said to his probation officer that his  mother
    still lived in Somalia  and  that  he  was  in  contact  with  her.  He
    therefore must have had in mind the  appellant's  contention  that  the
    probation officer  had  made  a  mistake  and  rejected  it.  Mr  Kotas
    therefore submitted that the  judge's  findings  that  the  appellant's
    mother still lives in Somalia and that he is in contact with her should
    stand.

17. Mr Smyth submitted the judge had failed to consider the possibility  of
    an error on the part of the  probation  officer.  At  para  43  of  his
    decision, he asked a rhetorical question but  failed  to  consider  the
    obvious answer, that it was a mistake on  the  part  of  the  probation
    officer. As a matter of logic, the appellant had effectively said  that
    the probation officer had made a mistake, which the judge had failed to
    consider. Mr Smyth asked me not to view ground 3 in  isolation  but  to
    take into account the fact that, given the judge's failure to carry out
    any analysis of the issues in the case, his errors were such  that  the
    appellant has been deprived of a fair hearing. He therefore asked me to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  re-hearing  on  the
    merits.

18. Mr Kotas submitted that ground 3 was a disagreement  with  the  judge's
    finding.  The  judge  was  faced  with  two  possibilities,  i.e.   the
    appellant's evidence at the hearing which effectively meant that he was
    saying that the probation officer  had  made  a  mistake  or  that  the
    appellant had been inconsistent as to whether his mother was living  in
    Kenya or in Somalia. He asked me to preserve the judge's  finding  that
    the appellant's mother lives in Somalia and that he is in contact  with
    her. Mr Kotas took a neutral stance as to whether  or  not  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. I reserved my decision on ground 3.

20. As I said, given  that  I  had  decided  that  grounds  1  and  2  were
    established, ground 3 concerned the ambit of the re-making. In reaching
    my decision on this issue, I took to account the following:

         (i)  Ground 3 concerns credibility, whereas grounds 1 and 2 do not.
         In principle, therefore, there is no reason why the fact  that  the
         judge materially erred in law as  contended  in  grounds  1  and  2
         should have any impact on his  assessment  of  credibility.  I  can
         therefore see some force in the submissions of Mr Kotas.

         (ii) On the other  hand,  I  can  also  see  force  in  Mr  Smyth's
         submission that ground 3 should to be viewed in isolation and  that
         it is relevant to take into account the scale of the errors made by
         the judge in relation to grounds 1 and 2. Indeed, not only did  the
         judge err as contended in grounds  1  and  2,  he  also  failed  to
         consider whether the presumptions in  s.72  were  rebutted.  It  is
         difficult to escape the conclusion that the appellant has not had a
         fair hearing.

         (iii)    At the commencement of the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Smyth
         submitted a witness statement from the appellant  dated  14  August
         2019 with attachments. Although this evidence is  not  relevant  in
         deciding whether the judge had materially erred in law and  whether
         his decision should be set aside as I said at the  hearing,  it  is
         relevant in deciding the ambit of the re-making of the decision  on
         the appellant's appeal. In this bundle,  the  appellant  relies  on
         fresh evidence to show that his mother is living in Kenya.  In  re-
         making the decision, it would be unfair to exclude  this  evidence.
         I therefore admit the evidence.

         (iv) Having admitted the recent witness statement for  the  purpose
         of re-making  the  decision  on  the  appellant's  appeal,  I  have
         concluded that the judge hearing the appeal on  the  next  occasion
         should be at liberty to make his or her own findings afresh on  the
         evidence as a whole.

21.  In all of the circumstances and for the reasons  given  above,  I  have
    decided that the judge's finding that the appellant's mother is  living
    in Somalia should not stand.

22.  It is clear from the above that all the issues in the  case  will  have
    to be considered afresh, that is, the cessation provisions and (in  the
    event that the cessation provisions are applied), the  presumptions  in
    s.72, credibility and the appellant's claims under  Articles  2  and  3
    and,  if  the  presumptions  in  s.72  are  rebutted,  his  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claims. In these circumstances, I have  decided
    that this appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing on the merits by a judge other than Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal M A Khan.

21. At  the  hearing  before  the  judge,  the  appellant's  representative
    submitted that his Article 8 case was very weak and that  she  was  not
    seeking to rely upon Article 8 (para 36 of the judge's  decision).  The
    grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal did not raise Article 8. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr
    Smyth confirmed that Article 8 was not relied  upon.  Accordingly,  the
    issues to be considered by the  FtT  following  the  remittal  of  this
    appeal do not include the appellant's Article 8 claim.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  M  A  Khan  involved  the
making of errors on points of law such that  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
appeal is set aside.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on  the
merits by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M A Khan.


[pic]
Signed                     Date: 16 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
