
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00046/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July 2020                       |On 20 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     RM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1963 and is  a  male  citizen  of  Sudan.  He
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent, dated 25 April 2019,  to  refuse  his  human  rights  claim
    having made, on the same date,  a  deportation  order.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 11 December 2019, dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. On 17 April 2020, the Upper Tribunal issued directions indicating  that
    it had reached a provisional view  that  it  would  be  appropriate  to
    determine matters of error of law/setting aside the First-tier Tribunal
    decision without a  hearing  under  Rule  34  of  the  Tribunal  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008. The appellant's representatives have responded to
    those directions; the Secretary of State  has  not  responded.  I  have
    considered the file generally and the submissions  of  the  appellant's
    representatives very carefully. In my view, it is  axiomatic  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal has erred  in  law  and  that  this  appeal  should
    succeed. As a consequence, I have decided to set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  without  convening  an  oral  initial  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal. In reaching that decision, I have had regard
    to the Pilot Practice Direction: Contingency arrangements in the First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal and to Presidential Guidance  Note
    No. 1 (2020): Arrangements during the Covi-19 Pandemic (in  particular,
    at [4]). I consider that, given that the error of law in this  instance
    is obvious and touches directly upon the fairness of the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal, I have acted both  fairly  and  reasonably  by
    proceeding in this manner

 3. Ms Radford of Counsel has drafted not only the appellant's response  to
    the April 2020 directions but also a witness statement  containing  her
    statement of truth concerning events at the First-tier Tribunal hearing
    before Judge Webb on 8 November 2019. The accuracy  of  that  statement
    has not been challenged by the respondent and I accept the contents  as
    true and accurate.

 4. I accept that Judge Webb did not refer at the hearing to  events  which
    had taken place in Sudan which post-dated the evidence contained in the
    bundles of the appellant and respondent. I accept that Ms  Radford  was
    not aware of those events. At [35], the judge had taken 'judicial note'
    (sic) that on 17 July 2019 political opponents in Sudan had reached  an
    agreement, particulars of which  he  then  provides.  At  [36],  having
    detailed the evidence of which  he  taken  'judicial  note'  the  judge
    writes that 'Counsel for the appellant nevertheless argues  that  there
    has been a serious deterioration in the situation in  Sudan  sufficient
    to make the previous country guidance case  is  largely  obsolete  that
    there is a real risk the appellant on return.' I accept the evidence of
    Ms Radford that she was given no opportunity  to  make  submissions  in
    respect of the events  described  by  the  judge  at  [35]  or  on  the
    continued relevance of the extant country guidance. I  find  that  this
    constituted an error of law. Further, in the subsequent  paragraphs,  I
    find that the judge has perpetrated the further error of deciding  upon
    the weight to be given to the expert report of Mr  Verney,  upon  which
    the appellant sought to rely, by reference to those matters upon  which
    he had taken 'judicial note' and upon which  he  had  not  invited  any
    submissions from the representatives. Further, by  deciding  to  depart
    from the country guidance binding at the time of the hearing (AAR &  AA
    (Non-Arab Darfuris - return Sudan) [2019] UKUT 0028(IAC)) in the  light
    of evidence of which only he was aware, he perpetrated a further  error
    of law. These are all matters which affected substantively the fairness
    of the hearing and which, in my opinion, undermine the judge's decision
    so fundamentally that it should be set aside.

 5. There will need to be a hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal;
    given the nature of the error of law in this instance and the need  for
    a new fact-finding exercise, it is not appropriate for  the  appeal  to
    remain in the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None of  the  findings
of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
that Tribunal to remake the decision following a hearing de novo.

Signed                              Date 2 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

