
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20th February 2018                      |On 2nd March 2018              |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE NICKLIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Amir [E]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Patyna, Counsel, instructed by Fletcher Dervish
& Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Mr [E] is a citizen of Iran.  He is now  28.   He  first  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2004 when he was aged 14.   He  accompanied  at  that
    point his mother and his brother.  His mother  claimed  asylum  on  the
    grounds of her conversion from Islam to Christianity. After an  initial
    refusal of her claim  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr [E]'s  mother
    successfully challenged that decision. She was granted indefinite leave
    to remain from 4th October 2004 as a refugee and he was granted refugee
    status in line with his mother.  On 23rd August 2010,  Mr  [E]  pleaded
    guilty to conspiracy to supply of cocaine and heroin.  In total he  was
    sentenced to 40 months' imprisonment or  detention  consisting  of  two
    concurrent sentences of equal length.

2.   On 24th June 2015, the Secretary of State decided  to  cease  Mr  [E]'s
    refugee status.  Thereafter followed a series of further  decisions  to
    deport Mr [E] and to refuse his human rights claim. Mr  [E]  challenged
    these decisions. His appeal came before Judge Walters on 10th and  11th
    August 2017. The judge's decision was  promulgated  on  14th  September
    2017. The judge dismissed Mr [E]'s challenge to the  cessation  of  his
    refugee status. It was common ground before the judge that, as a result
    of his conviction in 2010, Mr [E] fell to  be  treated  as  a  "foreign
    criminal".  As such the Secretary of  State  was  required  to  make  a
    deportation order unless Mr [E] fell within one of  the  exceptions  in
    Section 33 of the UK Borders Act  2007.   The  judge  was  nevertheless
    satisfied pursuant to Section 33(2) that the removal of  Mr  [E]  would
    breach his Convention rights, namely his Article 8 rights  in  view  of
    his "genuine and subsisting relationship" with his daughter  [M],  born
    on [ ] 2016, and his partner, [AP], a UK citizen.

3.   The judge found that Mr [E] did not qualify  under  paragraph  399A  of
    the immigration rules but that his claim did succeed  under  paragraphs
    399(a) and (b) on the grounds that he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  with  [AP]  and  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with his daughter, who is entitled to British  citizenship
    through her mother, and that it would be unduly harsh for [AP] and  [M]
    to live in Iran.

4.    The  judge  also  found  that  "it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's daughter to remain in the UK without the appellant  because
    that would deprive her of her father", paragraph 75  of  the  judgment.
    He therefore allowed Mr [E]'s appeal against the deportation order  and
    the refusal of his human rights claim.

5.   With the permission of Upper Tribunal Judge  Keki?,  the  Secretary  of
    State challenges the judge's finding that it would be unduly harsh  for
    the appellant's daughter to  have  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without the appellant. She relies upon the decisions  of  KMO  (section
    117 - unduly harsh) (Nigeria) [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC), MM (Uganda) [2016]
    EWCA Civ 450 and AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 to the effect  that
    unduly  harshness  requires  a  high  threshold  beyond  the   expected
    harshness that would follow from the separation of a child from his  or
    her parent.

6.   In MM (Uganda), Laws LJ held that when determining undue harshness  the
    court should have regard to all of the circumstances.   These  included
    the applicant's immigration and criminal history.  At paragraph  24  he
    said this:
         "This steers the Tribunals and the court  towards  a  proportionate
         assessment  of  the  criminal's  deportation  in  any  given  case.
         Accordingly the more pressing the public interest in  his  removal,
         the harder it will be to show that  the  effect  on  his  child  or
         partner will be unduly harsh."

    That decision was followed in MA (Pakistan) & Ors  -v-  Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

7.   As I have mentioned, the Secretary of State  relies  on  AJ  (Zimbabwe)
    (and  the  cases  identified  in  that  decision)  in  challenging  the
    lawfulness of the judge's conclusion that the impact on Mr [E]'s  child
    would be unduly harsh.  Having considered the relevant legal principles
    and relevant authorities, the court, at paragraph 17 indicated, that it
    would be rare for the best interests of the children  to  outweigh  the
    strong public interest in deporting foreign criminals.
         "Something  more  than  a  lengthy  separation  from  a  parent  is
         required, even though such separation is detrimental to the child's
         best  interests.   That  is  commonplace  and  not   a   compelling
         circumstance.   ...   In  many,  if  not  most,  cases  where  this
         exception  is  potentially  engaged  there  will  be   the   normal
         relationship of love and affection between parent and child and  it
         is virtually always in the best interests of  the  child  for  that
         relationship  to  continue.   If  that  were   enough   to   render
         deportation a disproportionate interference with  family  life,  it
         would drain the Rule of any practical significance",

    and then at paragraph 31 the court stated:
         "It was not open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that  the
         separation of the children from the  father  or  stepfather  was  a
         compelling reason to allow the  respondent  to  remain.   Far  from
         being an exceptional circumstance, this is an everyday situation as
         the authorities I have set out demonstrate.   They  show  that  the
         separating parent and child cannot, without more, be a good  reason
         to outweigh the very powerful public interest in  deportation.   No
         doubt the First-tier Tribunal was right to say that these  children
         would unfortunately suffer from the separation but  for  reasons  I
         have already explained, if the concept of exceptional circumstances
         can apply in such a case, it would undermine the application of the
         Immigration Rules",

    and at paragraph 46 the Court of Appeal indicated on the facts of  that
    case that there would be some emotional  damage  to  the  children  but
    noted that this was not unusual whenever a parent is deported  and  the
    child is unable to live with that parent outside the UK.

8.   In NA (Pakistan) -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department  &  Ors
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662 [34] the Court said:
         "The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,  as
         identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy Prosecutor  of  the  Italian
         Republic  [2013]  1  AC  338  at  [145].   Nevertheless,  it  is  a
         consequence of criminal conduct that  offenders  may  be  separated
         from their children for many years, contrary to the best  interests
         of those children.  The desirability of children  being  with  both
         parents is a commonplace of family life.  That  is  not  usually  a
         sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh  the  high  public
         interest in deporting foreign criminals.  As Lady Justice  Rafferty
         observed in Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  -v-  CT
         (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at paragraph 38: 'Neither the British
         nationality  of  the  respondent's  children   nor   their   likely
         separation from their  father  for  a  long  time  are  exceptional
         circumstances  which  outweigh   the   public   interest   in   his
         deportation.'

9.   In WZ (China) -v- The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 795 [14] Sir Stanley Burnton said:
         "I bear in mind that he has an  established  family  life  in  this
         country, that his family and children have UK nationality, and that
         his wife would have to give up work to look after the  children  if
         he were removed and they were to remain in this country.   However,
         none  of  these  facts  takes  his  case  out  of   the   ordinary.
         Deportation necessarily results in the break-up of  the  deportee's
         family if they remain in this country after his removal."

10.  It is apparent from the authorities  that  I  have  set  out  that  the
    "unduly harsh" test in  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    reflected in Section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, has a very high threshold and that the separation  of  parent
    and child (even where this may result in some emotional damage  to  the
    child) will not ordinarily meet the test.  The submission is  that  the
    judge's assessment in respect of undue harshness in paragraphs 75 to 77
    of  the  judgment  is  "is  inadequate  and  not  reasoned,  being  one
    dimensional and therefore incomplete".

11.  It is unfortunate that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  raise  the
    complaint about the inadequacy of reasons with the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  In English -v- Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd. [2002] 1  WLR  2409
    the Court of Appeal stated [22]-[25]:
         "22. In Flannery's case [2000] 1 WLR 377 at 383 the court made  two
             suggestions with a view to preventing unnecessary  appeals  on
             the ground of the absence of reasons.  It suggested  that  one
             remedy open to the appeal court would be to remit  the  matter
             to the trial judge with an invitation or requirement  to  give
             reasons.   In  Flannery's  case  this   was   not   considered
             appropriate because more than a  year  had  passed  since  the
             hearing.  The  delay  between  the  hearing  and  appeal  will
             normally be too long to make a remission to  the  trial  judge
             for further reasons a desirable course.  The same is not  true
             of the position shortly after judgment has been given.
         23.  The other suggestion made by the court in Flannery's case  was
             that the respondent to an application for permission to appeal
             on the ground of lack of reasons should consider inviting  the
             judge to give his reasons, and his explanation as to why  they
             were not set out in the judgment, in an affidavit for  use  at
             the leave hearing and at the hearing if leave be granted.
         24.  We are not greatly attracted by the suggestion  that  a  judge
             who has given inadequate reasons should be invited to  have  a
             second bite at the cherry.  But we are much less attracted  at
             the prospect of expensive appellate proceedings on the  ground
             of lack of  reasons.   Where  the  judge  who  has  heard  the
             evidence has based a rational decision on it,  the  successful
             party will suffer an injustice if that decision  is  appealed,
             let alone set aside, simply because the judge has not included
             in his  judgment  adequate  reasons  for  his  decision.   The
             appellate  court  will  not  be  in  as  good  a  position  to
             substitute its decision, should it decide that this course  is
             viable, while an appeal followed by a rehearing will involve a
             hideous waste of costs.
         25.   Accordingly,  we  recommend  the  following  course.   If  an
             application for permission to appeal on the ground of lack  of
             reasons is made to the trial judge, the judge should  consider
             whether  his  judgment  is  defective  for  lack  of  reasons,
             adjourning for that purpose should he find this necessary.  If
             he concludes that it is, he  should  set  out  to  remedy  the
             defect  by  the  provision  of  additional  reasons   refusing
             permission to appeal on the basis that  he  has  adopted  that
             course.  If he concludes that he has given  adequate  reasons,
             he  will  no  doubt  refuse  permission  to  appeal.   If   an
             application for permission to appeal on the ground of lack  of
             reasons is made to the appellate court and it appears  to  the
             appellate court  that  the  application  is  well-founded,  it
             should consider adjourning the application and  remitting  the
             case  to  the  trial  judge  with  an  invitation  to  provide
             additional reasons for his decision or, where appropriate, for
             his reasons for a specific  finding  or  findings.  Where  the
             appellate court is in doubt as  to  whether  the  reasons  are
             adequate, it may be appropriate to direct that the application
             be adjourned to an oral hearing, on notice to the respondent."

12.  In this case, we find there is substantial force in  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  to
    support his conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for [M] to have to
    remain in the UK without Mr [E].  What is clear from the authorities is
    that there are many  factors  that  a  court  needs  to  consider.  The
    decision of WZ (China) shows  that  even  findings  of  what  might  be
    regarded as consequences of some harshness in relation  to  deportation
    and the effect on the deportee's family nevertheless did not  meet  the
    required standard.

13.  It is plain, I regret to say, that paragraph  75  does  not  contain  a
    reasoned conclusion as  to  why  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's daughter to remain in the UK  without  the  appellant.   As
    such that finding cannot stand for the lack of reasons.

14.  What should we do now? Well, given the nature of the work of the First-
    tier Tribunal, and the very large number of cases that the  judge  will
    have dealt with, it is unrealistic to expect this judge to remember  at
    this distance what else he had in mind, if  anything,  to  support  his
    finding of undue harshness.  We therefore have two choices.  One is  to
    remit the matter for reconsideration by the First-tier Tribunal or  for
    the Upper Tribunal to decide the point itself. We are not in a position
    to do so today because we do  not  have  the  evidence  that  would  be
    relevant to making that decision.

15.  Consequently, the appeal is allowed and the case will  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal R G Walters.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The  case  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal to reconsider afresh the article 8  appeal  only,  there
being no challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision in respect  of  the
protection appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:[pic]      Date: 20 February 2018
The Honourable Mr Justice Nicklin
