
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00062/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2019                  |On 21 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     MMB
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms C Philips of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Ms I Vijiwala, Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan promulgated on 12 August  2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to cease his refugee status
    and deportation was dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe,  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom with valid entry clearance as a student  in  2003.   He  sought
    further leave to remain as a student nurse on 5 January 2005 which  was
    refused and he was served with a notice for administrative  removal  on
    26 January 2008.  The Appellant claimed asylum on 7 August 2009,  which
    was initially refused by the Respondent, but his appeal was allowed  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on 3 November  2009,  following  which  he  was
    granted limited leave to remain and then indefinite leave to remain  on
    12 February 2015.

 3. The Appellant was convicted of separate motoring  offences  on  20  May
    2015 and 9 July 2015.  He was convicted of sexual assault on  27  March
    2017, for which he was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  five
    years three months and placed on the sex offenders register  for  life.
    Following this conviction, the Respondent notified the Appellant of her
    intention to cease his refugee status and to deport him from the United
    Kingdom.

 4. The Respondent revoked the Appellant's refugee status on 9 May 2019 and
    made a decision to deport the Appellant on 12 June 2019.   In  relation
    to the revocation, the Respondent set out the basis of the  Appellant's
    asylum claim which was due to his mother's political activities for the
    MDC in and around 2002, which resulted in her  death.   The  Respondent
    found that the Appellant did not have a political profile  himself  and
    that he would no longer  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Zimbabwe,  where
    conditions have changed since the events upon which  the  asylum  claim
    was originally based.  The Appellant would be able  to  return  to  his
    home area of Harare without risk and without any breach of  Articles  2
    and/or 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 5. In relation to deportation, the Respondent applied the  presumption  in
    section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that the
    Appellant had been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and
    constituted a danger to the community of the  United  Kingdom,  without
    the presumption having been rebutted by the  Appellant.   As  such  the
    Appellant was not entitled to the protection of the Refugee  Convention
    and was also excluded from humanitarian protection and under  paragraph
    339D of the Immigration Rules.   The  Respondent  also  considered  the
    Appellant's family and private life,  the  claim  being  based  on  the
    Appellant having a partner and two children in the United Kingdom and a
    brother who was a British citizen.  There was however  no  evidence  of
    family relationships before the Respondent such that neither the family
    nor the private life exceptions to deportation were met.

 6. Judge Sullivan dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    August 2019 on all grounds.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    Appellant had not  rebutted  the  presumption  in  section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  in  any  event  the
    Appellant would not be at risk on return to Zimbabwe.   In  particular,
    the Appellant was not an MDC supporter; there was no  evidence  of  any
    risk to him due to family relationships 17 years after  the  events  in
    2002 and there was no reason not to apply the country guidance case  of
    CM (EM country guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  p2013]  UKUT  00059
    (IAC) which remained applicable and which the Appellant  did  not  fall
    within the  risk  categories  of.   Finally,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered the Appellant's family life in the United Kingdom, found his
    evidence in relation to his relationships not to be truthful  and  that
    he had no subsisting parental relationship with either of his children.
     The exceptions to deportation on the basis of family life were not met
    and there were no very compelling circumstances to outweigh the  public
    interest in the Appellant's deportation.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on three grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in refusing to depart from country guidance in CM
    for two main reasons.  First,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  wrongly
    relied on the Court of Appeal's decision  in  Harveye  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ  2848,  misunderstanding
    the nature of that appeal and secondly, by failing to  have  regard  to
    the whole of the most recent CPIN and  making  factual  errors  in  the
    summary given of the part of that report which was available before the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The second ground of appeal is  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in finding that there had been  a  significant  and
    durable change  in  circumstances  in  Zimbabwe,  also  by  failing  to
    consider the whole of the most recent CPIN and failing to give  reasons
    for the conclusion despite the recent spikes in  violence  in  Zimbabwe
    which were themselves inconsistent with a permanent eradication of risk
    to this  Appellant.   Further,  that  in  this  regard  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed have regard to the UNHCR guidelines or views as to  the
    current situation in Zimbabwe.  The third ground of appeal is that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  give  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant was not at risk in accordance with the  country  guidance  in
    paragraph 5 of CM, with a failure to make any findings as  to  why  the
    Appellant would  not  engage  in  political  activities  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe when it was accepted that his mother had been murdered by Zanu
    PF supporters and that he had refused to join the Zanu PF youth.

 8. At the oral hearing, the written grounds of appeal were relied upon and
    expanded in oral submissions.  In relation to the country guidance,  it
    was submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  relied  on  CM  and
    misunderstood that the decision in Harveye was not a review of the then
    current circumstances in Zimbabwe but only a review of  the  lawfulness
    of the Upper Tribunal's decision in 2016, which itself refers  back  to
    evidence from around 2014.  This was submitted to be a  material  error
    as it formed the basis of what was said to be only a limited assessment
    of whether it was appropriate to continue to apply the country guidance
    in CM or whether there was cogent  evidence  to  depart  from  it.   In
    relation to the CPIN, it was submitted that there was  a  duty  on  the
    Respondent to produce all relevant material to the First-tier Tribunal,
    which included a responsibility in the  present  appeal  to  provide  a
    complete copy of the CPIN which  in  this  case  contained  information
    relevant to the issue of whether there should be a departure  from  the
    country guidance.

 9. There was a factual error in paragraph 35(d) of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, in that information in the  extract  of  the  CPIN
    which was before the Tribunal, confirmed that there had been  at  least
    eight deaths and that the violence had involved  not  only  leaders  of
    organisations, but also those without strong political views.  Further,
    paragraph 7.4.7 of the CPIN  referred  to  victims  of  violence  being
    random people and not just those with a significant MDC profile.   That
    was confirmed by other materials submitted by the Appellant before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It was submitted that  even  on  the  information
    that was  available  before  the  Tribunal,  there  was  a  failure  to
    recognise the deaths which had occurred and that not only  MDC  members
    had been targeted.  For example, the fuel  protests  involved  ordinary
    people and were not politically motivated attacks  on  those  involved.
    Further there was evidence that violence in Zimbabwe has in  fact  gone
    up, with the evidence from the UNHCR that the level of  violence  comes
    close to that in 2008, with a similar number  of  attacks  (albeit  not
    resulting in the same level of deaths as happened in 2008).

10. As to the second ground of challenge, the same errors of law as to  the
    consideration of the evidence were relied upon, with a failure  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal to  consider  all  of  the  evidence  and  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding significant and durable changes since  the
    grant of refugee status in this case.  There was no express application
    of the correct test nor any finding of a permanent eradication of  risk
    to the Appellant.  The First-tier Tribunal also failed to consider  the
    recent spikes in violence which  were  at  least  in  part  politically
    motivated and do not support a  finding  of  permanent  eradication  of
    risk.  The First-tier Tribunal failed to refer to or give any weight to
    the representations from the UNHCR.   Overall,  the  evidence  did  not
    support a finding that there had been fundamental or durable change  in
    Zimbabwe.

11. As to the third ground of challenge, it was submitted that even  if  it
    is still appropriate to apply the country  guidance  in  CM,  a  better
    analysis of why the Appellant does not fall within the risk  categories
    was required by the First-tier Tribunal given his history and grievance
    against the ruling political party because of the death of his  mother.
    However, it was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that he  had  never
    made a claim to be politically active in the United Kingdom, nor had he
    ever stated any intention to do so on return to Zimbabwe.

12. On behalf of the respondent,  it  was  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not refuse to depart from country guidance in  CM  because
    of the decision in Harveye, but  that  the  passage  of  time  did  not
    require a departure  from  the  country  guidance  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in any event went on to consider recent events  and  concluded
    that they did not provide cogent evidence for a departure from  country
    guidance.  Any reference to the Court of Appeal's decision  in  Harveye
    was not in the circumstances a material error.

13. In this appeal it was the Appellant who had provided  extracts  of  the
    CPIN to the First-tier Tribunal, which were not relied upon by  him  to
    depart from the country guidance or otherwise.  It was  submitted  that
    it was  unclear  how  the  full  and  complete  document  assisted  the
    Appellant in any event.  Although accepted that a number of deaths  had
    been reported  in  relation  to  the  election  violence,  overall  the
    evidence still pointed to a decline from the levels  of  violence  that
    were recorded in CM and more importantly at the time  of  the  previous
    country guidance and from the date  of  Appellant's  grant  of  refugee
    status.  The evidence supports the finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that there has been  a  fall  in  politically  motivated  human  rights
    violations and there was at least some evidence of improved practice in
    the new government.

14. Although the information contained in the CPIN does reference  risk  in
    relation to random attacks on those without MDC profile, it is not  the
    Appellant's claim that he would be at risk merely by  his  presence  in
    Zimbabwe or from any Article 15(c) risk but that he would  be  targeted
    by politically motivated violence.  The two spikes in  violence  around
    the elections and fuel protests in 2018  and  2019  respectively,  were
    both expressly referred to by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  overall
    there was sufficient evidence to support the conclusion that there  had
    been a decline in the overall levels of violence.

15. The Respondent relied on the Court of Appeal's decision in Secretary of
    State for the Home Department v MM (Zimbabwe) [2017] EWCA  Civ  797  to
    the  effect  that  whether  there  is   a   durable   change   includes
    consideration of changes within the  country  and  changes  within  the
    person and their individual  personal  characteristics  as  well.   The
    First-tier Tribunal expressly took this into account in paragraph 31 of
    the decision, finding that there was no reason to consider  that  there
    would be any interest in the Appellant from the  authorities  17  years
    after his mother's involvement with the MDC in 2002 and  there  was  no
    evidence of any risk to  connected  family  members.   The  Appellant's
    individual circumstances were considered, as were the  improvements  in
    the situation in Zimbabwe.

Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to the first ground of appeal as it is  important  to  look
    both that the Appellant's claim  and  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and detail of the decision in relation to the  application  of
    CM.  Before the First-tier Tribunal, as confirmed in paragraphs 15  and
    20(c) of the decision, the  Appellant's  claim  was  that  the  country
    guidance in CM should no longer be applied due to its  age.   There  is
    nothing  to  suggest  any  more  detailed  assessment  of  the  country
    guidance, nor reliance on any specific credible fresh  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal relevant to the issue which was  considered  in
    the country guidance case to  justify  a  departure  from  the  country
    guidance in CM.  The skeleton  argument  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
    refers to  background  evidence  about  the  change  of  government  in
    Zimbabwe and suggests that this has only cemented the position of  Zanu
    PF as the ruling party in Zimbabwe, as opposed to an event which  could
    lead to positive change in the country.  The  continuing  applicability
    or otherwise of the country guidance was not  covered  at  all  in  the
    skeleton argument prepared for  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which fails to make it any reference to the case  of  CM  and
    instead relies on the country guidance case of SM & Ors (MDC - Internal
    flight - risk categories)  [2005]  UKAIT  00100  CG  and  asserts  that
    although this may have been superseded (it was in fact removed from the
    country guidance list on 2 August 2006) it is still good law as a basis
    for reviewing the political situation in Zimbabwe.

 2. The difficulty for the Appellant in the first ground of appeal is  that
    what has been argued before the Upper  Tribunal  was,  aside  from  the
    point about misplaced reliance on the decision in Harveye,  in  essence
    new submissions as to why there should be a departure from CM primarily
    on the basis of a full copy of the CPIN which bore  no  resemblance  to
    the way that the case was put to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal can not be criticised for  not  considering  matters  not
    expressly put to it, nor evidence that was not before it.

 3. In paragraph 15 of the decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  first  notes
    the issue of whether the guidance in CM should  still  be  followed  by
    saying:

         "15. My attention has been drawn to the country guidance case of CM
         ...  I was asked by the Appellant's representative not to apply  it
         in part by reason of its age; I  take  into  account  that  it  was
         applied without criticism in Harveye ..."

 4. Although there is some force in the Appellant's challenge to the First-
    tier Tribunal's reliance on the Court of Appeal's decision in  Harveye,
    it being a decision on appeal looking whether there was an error of law
    in the earlier decision and did not include any assessment of  more  up
    to date or current evidence about the situation in Zimbabwe, I  do  not
    find that the reference to it is a material error of law by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  This is because in  any  event,  the  Appellant's  case
    before the First-tier Tribunal was only on the basis that CM should not
    be applied due to the  passage  of  time  since  its  promulgation  and
    further, the Judge went on in any event to  consider  as  a  matter  of
    substance whether there was fresh credible evidence to depart from  the
    country guidance.

 5. A Judge may depart from existing country guidance in the  circumstances
    described in paragraphs 11 and 12 of the Upper Tribunal Immigration and
    Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011 No  2.   This  confirms  that  unless
    expressly  superseded  or  replaced  by  any  later  country   guidance
    determination, or is inconsistent with other authority that is  binding
    on the Tribunal, a  country  guidance  case  is  authoritative  in  any
    subsequent appeal so far as it relates to the country guidance issue in
    question and depends on the same or  similar  evidence.   If  there  is
    credible fresh evidence  relevant  to  the  issue  that  has  not  been
    considered in the country guidance  case,  or,  if  a  subsequent  case
    includes further issues that have not been considered  in  the  country
    guidance case, a Judge will reach the  appropriate  conclusion  on  the
    evidence, taking into account the conclusion in  the  country  guidance
    case so far as it remains relevant.

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal considers the country  guidance
    and further evidence before it when assessing the Appellant's claim  in
    paragraphs 29 to 35, which state as follows:

          "29.    I turn now to the several human  rights  aspects  of  this
         claim.  I am satisfied that there have been significant changes  in
         country conditions  since  the  previous  determination.   This  is
         illustrated by the fact that the country guidance case RN, on which
         the previous determination was based, was removed from the list  of
         country guidance cases on 14 March 2011, replaced initially  by  EM
         and  Others  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG   [2011]   UKUT   98   (IAC)
         (subsequently quashed by the Court of Appeal and referred to in  RT
         (Zimbabwe) and others (Respondents) v Secretary of  State  for  the
         Home Department (Appellant) [2012] UKSC 38 and CM.

         30.  It remains the  position  that  the  Appellant  has  not  been
         politically active himself; he has never been an MDC  member.   The
         risk identified in November 2009 was on the basis that his  mother,
         who had died in 2002, had been a known MDC  organiser  and  on  the
         basis that he neither wanted to join or declare loyalty to ZP youth
         but was being harassed to do so.

         31.  I am not satisfied that, 17 years later, anyone would have any
         particular memory of or interest in the Appellant by reason of  his
         relationship with his late mother.  My attention has not been drawn
         to any recent evidence of a ZP purge on  the  families  of  earlier
         members of the MDC.  Much of the ZP violence is factional.

         32.  In my view it is not appropriate me to depart from  CM  simply
         because it is 6 � years old;  as  I  have  indicated  it  has  been
         considered by the Court of Appeal within the last eight months.   I
         have however considered to what  extent  evidence  of  more  recent
         events would justify a departure from those of the findings  in  CM
         that are relevant to the issues in this appeal.

         33.  The Tribunal  in  CM  found  that  the  level  of  politically
         motivated violence in Zimbabwe had  fallen  in  comparison  to  the
         levels referred to in  RN.   As  an  indication  of  the  situation
         prevailing when CM was being considered:

             a)   The number of reported politically motivated human rights
             violations had fallen from 3,758 in June 2008 to  42  in  June
             2012; MDC  supporters  remained  the  main  victims  of  those
             violations.

             b)   Despite that reduction "Zimbabwe remains a society  where
             great brutality and human rights abuses have taken  place  and
             both  the  political  instigators  of  those  abuses  and  the
             personnel who inflicted  them  remain  in  existence"  (as  at
             2012).

             c)   In Harare there were particular problems with one militia
             having links to ZP.  It operated mainly in the Mbare  area  of
             Harare and practised extortion.  There was no  army  operation
             against that extortion.

         34.  The extract from  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
         "Zimbabwe: Opposition to the government" dated February 2019  which
         has been included in the Appellant's bundle does  not  include  the
         precise data, as to numbers of human rights violations annually, of
         the type considered in CM.  Since CM was reported:

             a)   The MDC has broken into factions.

             b)   In November 2017 former President Mugabe left power being
             replaced by President Mnangagwa.  ZP  remained  (and  remains)
             and power following elections in July 2018.

             c)   There was a spike in violence around  the  times  of  the
             elections.  This included increased violence  in  Harare.   In
             turn this resulted in a crackdown on opposition leaders.

             d)   There  is  no  evidence  that  the  decline  in  violence
             reported in CM has reversed in the last six years.

         35.  The Appellant's  supplementary  bundle  includes  a  2017/2018
         Amnesty International ("AI") report and three news articles:

             a)   The 2017/2018 Amnesty International report was  published
             on 22 February 2018.  It is more than one year old.   It  pre-
             dates the most recent elections.

             b)   The economic situation in Zimbabwe had worsened  (the  AI
             report does not say  which  year  was  taken  as  a  point  of
             comparison); protests were forcibly dispersed and  freedom  of
             expression was restricted.  There were examples  of  arbitrary
             arrest, including of members a ZP faction.  Sad to say,  there
             is nothing  new  in  this.   I  am  not  satisfied  that  this
             represents a deterioration in the circumstances  examined  and
             found in CM.

             c)   In January  2019  there  were  protests  in  Harare  (and
             elsewhere) about  fuel  prices.   The  MDC  headquarters  were
             attacked  but  the  reason  for  the   attack   was   unclear.
             Confidence in the currency had diminished, wages had stagnated
             and there was low  productivity,  contributing  to  an  import
             export balance.  The  report  refers  to  "years  of  economic
             hardship".  I note that there are several references in CM  to
             the challenging economic circumstances in Zimbabwe in 2012.  I
             have not been given the data, for example, to  compare  petrol
             prices now with those in 2012 but I am satisfied that Zimbabwe
             was also suffering poor economic conditions then.  It is not a
             new development.

             d)   It is reported that in the crackdown which  followed  the
             January 2019  fuel  protests  an  unspecified  number  of  MDC
             members, including 4 MPs, were detained  by  the  authorities.
             Reports of killings were  not  confirmed.   What  is  striking
             about this report  is  that  it  focuses  on  the  leaders  of
             organisations and I note the distinction in CM  between  those
             with and without, for example, a significant MDC  profile.   I
             am not satisfied that the  situation  had  changed  materially
             since CM and given the time  that  has  elapsed  since  CM  it
             appears to me that the improvements reported that  may  fairly
             be described as durable and significant."

 7. The Appellant relies on a factual  error  in  paragraph  35(d)  of  the
    decision in that even the extracts of the CPIN  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, without having to refer to the full  report  (which  was  not
    available), deaths had been confirmed during demonstrations against the
    government and that the government  crackdown  included  many  ordinary
    people caught up in the operation and  not  just  political  opponents,
    trade unionists or organisers.  However, paragraph 35(d) gives specific
    consideration only to those  documents  contained  in  the  Appellant's
    supplementary bundle, including the Amnesty  International  report  and
    three news articles and is not a finding of fact on the evidence  as  a
    whole.  It is an accurate  summary  of  the  information  contained  in
    particular in the BBC News  article  of  21  January  2019  as  to  the
    crackdown following the fuel protests and  in  general  it  is  a  fair
    summary to say that these particular documents relied upon continue  to
    refer to leaders of the political opposition and their families.  I  do
    not therefore find that there is a factual error in paragraph 35(d)  as
    claimed.  At its highest, the point can only  be  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not go further in the assessment of the evidence  to  note
    other background material contained in the CPIN went further  in  terms
    of confirmed casualties and wider targeting  by  the  authorities  than
    these  specific  reports.   Given  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    expressly considered the contents of the CPIN before it in the  broader
    context, I do not find that there is an error of law in  not  referring
    in detail to each and every piece of evidence, particularly when  there
    is nothing to suggest any specific reliance by the Appellant  on  these
    particular points.

 8. The Appellant's final point in relation to the first ground  of  appeal
    is that the Respondent was under  a  duty  to  provide  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with a full copy of the CPIN which included more detail  about
    post-election  violence  and  the  fuel  protests  in  2018  and   2019
    respectively which, by implication, must be said to provide  sufficient
    fresh credible evidence to depart from the country guidance in CM to be
    material.  It is of note that in this case, it was  the  Appellant  who
    chose only to rely on an extract of the CPIN and not the full document,
    which only highlights further the nature and way that his claim was put
    to the First-tier Tribunal, which was  on  a  different  basis  to  the
    detailed  arguments  made  before  the  Upper   Tribunal.    In   these
    circumstances, there was no failure by the Respondent  to  comply  with
    its duties to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The question  then  remains  as  to  whether  overall,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in its assessment of whether there  should  be  a
    departure from the country guidance in CM.  I find that the  First-tier
    Tribunal made a sufficiently detailed assessment of the evidence before
    it as to whether there was a reason to depart from country guidance  in
    CM, either because of the passage of time or because  there  was  fresh
    credible up-to-date evidence  not  previously  considered.   The  broad
    circumstances and findings at the time of CM were set out and  compared
    to up-to-date background evidence.  The conclusion  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the situation had not changed materially since CM was one
    which was open to it on the evidence available and adequately reasoned.
     I have separately considered the CPIN in full and would find that even
    had the whole of this document been before the First-tier Tribunal,  it
    would have still rationally have been open to  the  Judge  to  conclude
    that there was no basis for a departure from the  country  guidance  in
    CM.  For these reasons, there is no error of law on the first ground of
    appeal.

10. The second ground of appeal relies in part on the same claimed  factual
    errors and errors in the assessment of the evidence by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as in the first ground of  appeal  and  to  that  extent  have
    already been dealt with above.  The additional  points  in  the  second
    ground of challenge were a failure by the First-tier Tribunal  to  give
    sufficient weight to the representations from the UNHCR; a  failure  to
    expressly apply the correct test of permanent eradication  of  risk  to
    the Appellant and a failure to give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  a
    significant and durable change in country conditions.

11. The First-tier Tribunal specifically references the change  in  country
    guidance from RN promulgated in 2008 to CM, promulgated in 2013,  which
    of itself demonstrates a significant change in country conditions and a
    significant reduction in those who  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe in the passage of around five years.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    has considered evidence postdating CM and found, inter-alia, that there
    was no evidence that the decline in violence reported in  CM  had  been
    reversed in the intervening six years to 2019 and that  other  matters,
    such as poor economic conditions were not a new development.   I  would
    further note that spikes in violence around  election  times  are  also
    nothing new in Zimbabwe and do not  necessarily  affect  the  sustained
    downward trend nor with themselves be inconsistent with  a  finding  of
    significant and durable change in Zimbabwe.

12. There is no  express  reference  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to the representations from the UNHCR dated 25 September 2018,
    nor is there any indication that  the  Appellant  placed  any  specific
    reliance on this document in support  of  his  appeal.   This  did  not
    feature at all in his skeleton argument.  It is further  noteworthy  in
    this case there is no comment on or assessment  by  the  UNHCR  of  the
    development in country guidance or the wealth of background information
    considered therein by the Upper Tribunal, although there  is  reference
    to the CPIN, the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  2018  and  the  Amnesty
    International Report 2016/17, the conclusion is that the CPIN indicates
    a  lack  of  fundamental  and  durable  change  in   Zimbabwe   and   a
    recommendation  is  made  for  a  fuller  assessment  to  be  made   of
    improvements  in  Zimbabwe  and  the  personal  circumstances  of   the
    Appellant.  It cannot be argued that the First-tier Tribunal has failed
    to make such a full assessment of the evidence before it,  both  as  to
    country conditions and as to the  Appellant's  personal  circumstances.
    In these circumstances and considering that it is not necessary  for  a
    Tribunal to refer to each and every piece of evidence before it in  the
    decision and that the weight to be attached to evidences a  matter  for
    the particular Judge; I find no error of law by the First-tier Tribunal
    in its assessment of the UNHCR evidence.

13. Overall, the First-tier Tribunal has identified the need for  there  to
    be durable and significant improvements in  country  conditions  for  a
    cessation of refugee status and has considered both country  conditions
    and the Appellant's personal circumstances in detail in  the  decision.
    There is nothing on the face of the decision or  otherwise  to  suggest
    that the proper test has not been applied by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and the conclusions  reached  are  sustainable  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before it, and in particular apply the country guidance in  CM
    and the improvements in country conditions reported therein.  For these
    reasons I find no error of law in the second ground of appeal.

14. The third ground of challenge lacks any arguable merit whatsoever.  The
    Appellant has  never  claimed  to  be  politically  active,  either  in
    Zimbabwe or in the United Kingdom and has never indicated any intention
    to be politically active on return to Zimbabwe in the future.  Further,
    the latter cannot be implied from the  Appellant's  history  or  family
    circumstances.  The Appellant was  previously  granted  asylum  on  the
    basis of his mother's MDC connections up to 2002 and on the basis  that
    also at that time, he was unwilling and unable to  demonstrate  support
    for Zanu PF.  That was the basis upon which his appeal  was  successful
    in 2009, in accordance with the country guidance at that time which was
    that a person was at real risk on  return  to  Zimbabwe  if  they  were
    unable to demonstrate loyalty to  Zanu  PF.   The  Appellant's  written
    statement for his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal identified  his
    risk on return as being from his inability to  demonstrate  loyalty  to
    Zanu PF; the general situation of human rights violations  in  Zimbabwe
    and his mother's prior involvement with  the  MDC.   However,  none  of
    those matters fall within the country guidance of  CM  and  no  further
    reasons were required given the way the case was put to the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to why the Appellant would not be at risk on  return.   The
    reasons given in paragraph 36 and 37 of the  decision  are  lawful  and
    adequate.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]         Date         17th January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

