
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00005/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates Court|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th January 2016                 |On 22nd January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                             mr abdifatah osman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:    Mr M Dwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against a Decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Henderson
    promulgated on 22nd October  2015.   The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Somalia born on 11th January 1987.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal against the  Secretary  of
    State's decision, taken on 22nd January  2015  to  revoke  his  refugee
    status and deport him to Somalia.

 3. A First-tier Tribunal Judge granted permission on the  basis  that  she
    thought it arguable that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  failing  to  make
    material findings relevant to  cessation  of  the  Appellant's  refugee
    status. It is said that the Judge  correctly  identified  the  test  at
    paragraph 29 of the Decision and Reasons but did not appear to make any
    findings as to fundamental and durable changes which can be assumed  to
    remove the basis of fear of persecution. It  is  said  that  the  judge
    repeated the conclusion in the  country  guidance  case  of  MOJ  about
    durable changes in the sense that Al -Shabab had  withdrawn  completely
    from Mogadishu.  However the Judge granting permission to  appeal  said
    that fear of Al-Shabab was not the basis on which the Appellant and his
    family had been granted asylum. Secondly the  judge  felt  it  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal  may  have  erred  in  not  adjourning  or
    adjourning part  heard  so  that  evidence  could  be  heard  from  the
    Appellant's family who the Judge had been told were on their way.

 4. The background to this case is that the Appellant came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2001, aged 14. On 29th September 2001 he was granted asylum,
    along with his sister in line with his mother.

 5. The Appellant started to get into trouble from the age of 17  in  2004.
    In 2006 he was given a two-year sentence  for  possession  of  Class  A
    drugs with intent to supply. That conviction resulted in a decision  to
    deport him and the issue of a  certificate  pursuant  to  s.72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. However, he succeeded  in
    an appeal to the Tribunal  on  6th  September  2007,  the  Judge  being
    persuaded that he no longer represented a danger and  had  successfully
    rebutted the presumption in s.72 such that as a Refugee he could not be
    deported. The Judge accepted that he was a changed man.

 6. It transpired that the Judge's faith in the Appellant was misplaced  as
    he continued to offend. Only two years after that appeal  was  allowed,
    on 8th October 2009 he was convicted of four counts  of  possession  of
    Class  A  drugs  with  intent  to  supply  and  sentenced  to  3  years
    imprisonment. Another decision to deport him was made  and  section  72
    invoked.

 7. On 23rd October 2012  he  was  convicted  of  three  more  offences  of
    possession of Class A drugs with intent to supply and on this  occasion
    was sentenced to 5 years and seven months. Another deportation decision
    was taken along with the revocation of his refugee status  and  section
    72 invoked again. That was the decision  appealed  against  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the subject of the current appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 8. The issues to be decided in this case are firstly whether in accordance
    with section 72 and paragraph 339A (x) of  the  Immigration  Rules  the
    Appellant is excluded from refugee status. If so that would not prevent
    his deportation.

 9. If he is not excluded  from  refugee  status  by  reason  of  s.72  the
    question then is whether there have been  durable  changes  in  Somalia
    such that he is no longer in need of protection (paragraph 339A (v)  of
    the Immigration Rules and Article 1C(5).

10. If the Appellant is not entitled to refugee status the question then is
    whether he is at risk on return either on the  basis  of  his  original
    asylum claim or on the basis of his current claims.

11. If the Appellant  would not  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Somalia  the
    question then is whether he should succeed in his  appeal  against  the
    decision to deport him and in accordance with MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192 the Immigration Rules and paragraphs 398 & 399 are a  complete
    code in that respect.

12. There are thus two aspects to the continuation of his  refugee  status.
    One is whether the Secretary of State was  justified  in  revoking  his
    asylum status on the basis of changes  in  Somalia  and  the  other  is
    whether in any event section 72 prevents him from benefiting. So far as
    the first is concerned, the Judge  set out at  paragraph  28  that  the
    Appellant had argued that there were compelling reasons why his refugee
    status should not cease. It is said that he was born in  Mogadishu  and
    lived just outside the  city  and  that  he  and  his  family  suffered
    violence and persecution during the civil war. The Judge accepted  that
    to be the case; that they had suffered persecution as a  minority  clan
    being members of the Tunni clan. However the judge went on to say  that
    she was considering that matter in accordance with the current  country
    guidance case of MOJ & Ors (return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT
    00442 (IAC). The Judge also indicated that she had taken  careful  note
    of the letter from UNHCR dated 24th September 2014.

13. The Judge set out the requirements for the cessation clause in  Article
    1C (5) to be applicable, namely that there  had  been  fundamental  and
    durable changes in the country of origin  which  could  be  assumed  to
    remove the basis of the fear of persecution.

14. At paragraph 34 the Judge set out  the  relevant  paragraphs  from  MOJ
    which indicated that the original reason that the  Appellant  had  been
    granted asylum were no longer applicable.

15. It is true, as indicated in the grant of permission, that the Judge has
    then dealt with the question of risk and Al-Shabab, finding  that  risk
    did not apply. It is true that that was not the basis of  the  original
    grant of asylum. However it was the  basis  upon  which  the  Appellant
    claimed he should not now be removed. His case was, before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that if returned to Somalia he would join Al-Shabab  and
    start killing people. The Judge rejected those  claims  and  found  the
    Appellant was no longer entitled to asylum.

16. The Judge, having so found, there was no necessity for her to go on and
    consider s.72.  She ought to have started with s.72 but  nothing  turns
    on that. Had she done so, on the facts of this case, there is no  doubt
    that the certificate would have been upheld. The original  Tribunal  in
    his first  deportation  appeal  also  had  to  consider  a  section  72
    certificate. That Tribunal correctly set out at  paragraph  21  that  a
    person is not entitled to refugee status  where  there  are  reasonable
    grounds for regarding him to be a danger to the security of the country
    in which he is, or who,  having been convicted by a final judgement  of
    a particularly serious crime constitutes a danger to the  community  of
    that country.

17. Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  defines
    a particularly serious crime and states that a person shall be presumed
    to have been convicted by a final judgement of a  particularly  serious
    crime and constitute a danger to the community of the United Kingdom if
    he is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and sentenced to a
    period of imprisonment of at least two years. The presumption that such
    a criminal constitutes a danger to the community is rebuttable. In 2007
    the Tribunal expressed itself at paragraph 28 to be entirely  satisfied
    that this Appellant could not in any way be said to be a danger to  the
    community. He had credibly expressed his wish to  return  to  education
    and to his family environment and that his period of  imprisonment  had
    changed him. It was pointed out on his  behalf  that  he  was  not  the
    subject of any Court recommendation for deportation  and  that  he  was
    released on licence as someone who was considered to be  of  low  risk.
    That Tribunal was satisfied that the Appellant had demonstrated that he
    was not a danger to the community and the certificate  therefore  could
    not be upheld. On that basis it found that the refugee status could not
    be withdrawn, he remained a refugee and thus could not be deported.

18. Unfortunately, events since 2007 have proved that Tribunal to have been
    wrong. Far from being a reformed character  the  Appellant's  offending
    has escalated and the sentences appropriately longer. On that basis the
    Appellant cannot rebut the presumption and he is clearly  a  danger  to
    the community.  The Appellant claimed before me  to  have  changed  and
    been a model prisoner and asked for another chance.  He said  that  his
    children need him.  He has had a chance to show that he has changed and
    not taken it - twice.  He had children before committing  offences  and
    that did not deter him and in any  event  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    pointed  out  there  is  no  evidence  whatsoever  that  he   has   any
    relationship with them at all. Also, as the First-tier Tribunal  found,
    it is not in children's best interests to live  with  a  Class  A  drug
    dealer.

19. The Appellant is not entitled to refugee protection and  that  combined
    with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  the  situation
    in Somalia, in line with the Country Guidance  case  has  changed  such
    that he will not be at risk on return means  that  the  Appellant  must
    lose his appeal against the decision  to  revoke  his  refugee  status.
    Whilst the Judge could have been clearer in setting out  her  findings,
    reading the judgment as a whole it is perfectly clear what the findings
    were and I can find no material error of law to justify  it  being  set
    aside.

20. In  considering  the  deportation  itself,  while  the  Judge  has  not
    specifically referred to MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  or  the
    Immigration Rules as they relate to deportation, any error is  of  form
    not substance as she has  followed  the  principles  contained  in  the
    Immigration Rules.

21. The sentence was in excess of five years so the Appellant  case  cannot
    benefit from any of the exceptions contained in paragraph  399  of  the
    Rules. Paragraph 398 provides that a person such as this Appellant will
    be able to successfully  avoid  deportation  only  if  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances  over  and  above  the  exceptions  listed  in
    paragraph 399 and 399A. The Judge found at paragraphs 48  and  49  that
    there were not. That finding is unassailable as the  only  relationship
    capable of engaging Article 8 is the Appellant's relationship with  his
    partner and children and there  was  a  complete  absence  of  evidence
    before the Judge (and me) from his partner in terms of a  statement,  a
    letter or a presence at the hearing. There was a  complete  absence  of
    evidence as to the nature and strength of  his  relationship  with  his
    children and the frequency of any contact and on the dearth of evidence
    it was inevitable that the Judge would find no genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with either his partner or his children.

22. The only other relationships were his relationships with his mother and
    his sister. They had provided witness statements  which  were  unsigned
    and they did not attend the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

23. It is clear from the  Decision  and  Reasons  that  the  Appellant  had
    indicated their intention to attend and that they had a car trouble  en
    route. At paragraph 21 the Judge set out that  his  mother  and  sister
    were travelling to the hearing at Bradford from Leicester and when they
    had not arrived after the Appellant had completed his evidence she  set
    the case down so that he could telephone them. The Judge was then  told
    that they were 26 miles away from the hearing centre in a car. That was
    prior to midday. At two o'clock the judge was told  that  the  car  had
    broken down but they were not far away. The hearing concluded at  3  pm
    and they had still not arrived.

24. It is difficult to criticise the Judge given the leniency and time that
    was allowed for the witnesses to arrive. However, in  an  abundance  of
    fairness and given that those witnesses attended the hearing before me,
    albeit at 11.30 rather than 10am, I indicated that I would  hear  their
    evidence. Additionally they both signed the statements contained in the
    file.

25. Neither witness gave any evidence to indicate  anything  other  than  a
    normal relationship between a parent and her adult  child  and  between
    adult siblings. The Appellant's sister used to live with her mother  in
    Leicester but has recently moved with her husband  and  young  baby  to
    Birmingham. The Appellant, having been released on bail in mid-December
    2015 currently resides with his mother  in  Leicester.  Both  witnesses
    confirm that they as a family support  him  and  have  seen  a  lot  of
    changes in him. They did not believe Somalia to be a safe place for him
    and that he should be allowed to remain in United Kingdom.   They  said
    that the continuing relationship with his children was important to him
    and to them.

26. His mother said that she had no family in Somalia but  was  in  contact
    with the community there and it was the community who told her that her
    husband had been killed. On the basis of the evidence that I heard from
    the two witnesses, their evidence could  have  not  possibly  made  any
    difference to the outcome of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Judge's conclusion that there were no very compelling circumstances
    over and above the exceptions was patently the  correct  conclusion  in
    this case.

27. The Appellant's submission to me was that he knew he had made  mistakes
    but he wanted to remain in the United Kingdom for his children. He told
    me that he had done a lot in prison and there are reports  from  prison
    saying that he had done well. He also told  me  that  he  suffers  from
    psychiatric problems.  However this has never been mentioned before  by
    anyone and there is no medical evidence to support the assertion and  I
    reject it.

28. Looking at the First-tier Tribunal's Decision and Reasons  as  a  whole
    it is quite clear that the Judge found the Appellant is a) no longer in
    need of refugee protection on the basis of the change of  circumstances
    in Somalia as evidenced by the  Country  Guidance  case  and  b)  as  a
    foreign national criminal who has been convicted  three  times  now  of
    extremely serious drugs offences  his  deportation  is  in  the  public
    interest and there are no compelling or indeed any  circumstances  that
    could outweigh the very considerable  public  interest  in  this  case.
    Additionally he is not entitled to refugee status due to the gravity of
    the offences and continuing risk that he presents.

29. For all of the above reasons I find the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    make any material errors of law and I uphold the decision. On the facts
    of this case there is no possibility that any Judge would have come  to
    a different conclusion.

30. There has been no application of anonymity in this case and  I  see  no
    justification for making an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 21st January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

