
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  RP/00139/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 15 June 2021                     |On: 29 July 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COTTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GN
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr Chelvan, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),
    born in 1992.   The  Appellant  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  granting  the  Respondent's
    appeal.

Background

 2. The Respondent arrived in the UK in 2005, aged 12, to join  his  uncle.
    The Respondent has a partner and a daughter (referred to  as  XN)  with
    whom  (the  FtT  Judge  found)  he  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship.

 3. The Respondent has a number of previous convictions dating from 2011 to
    2017.  Relevant to this case is a 2017 conviction in  the  Crown  Court
    sitting at  Snaresbrook  for  a  single  count  of  acquiring  criminal
    property.  He was sentenced to 13 months imprisonment.

 4. The Appellant considered that the Respondent's uncle was no longer  out
    of favour with the government of DRC, and so determined that the  basis
    on which the Respondent was recognised as a refugee no longer  existed.
    Further,  the  Appellant  concluded,  the  Respondent's   most   recent
    conviction triggered the "automatic" deportation provision under s32 of
    the UK Borders Act  2007  and  so  served  a  decision  to  revoke  the
    Respondent's refugee status.  The Appellant rejected  the  Respondent's
    representations that removing him from the United  Kingdom  (UK)  would
    unlawfully breach his Rights under the Convention for the Protection of
    Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (the European Convention on Human
    Rights, or ECHR).

 5. The Respondent appealed to the FtT.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The determination of Judge Wilding of the FtT was promulgated on the 17
    March 2021.  The Respondent's case  was  that  being  returned  to  DRC
    would:

        a. Breach his rights under art 3 ECHR on the basis of  the  extreme
           poverty in DRC; and would

        b. Unjustifiably interfere with his art 8 ECHR rights in two ways:

        i.  In respect of his family life, it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           separate him from his daughter and partner; and

       ii. In respect of his private life, there would be very  significant
           obstacles to his integration on return to DRC.

 7. The Judge determined the appeal in favour of the Respondent.

The appeal

Permission to appeal

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by the FtT on the  26  March  2021  on
    grounds that the FtT:

        a. Arguably made an error of law by making inadequate  findings  in
           respect of the unduly harsh test; and

        b. Arguably made an error of law by making inadequate  findings  in
           respect of the finding of no very significant obstacles.

Submissions before us

 9. In considering whether the FtT Judge had made an error of law, we  took
    into consideration the  'reasons  for  appealing'  in  the  Appellant's
    application for permission to  appeal  dated  22  March  2021  and  the
    Respondent's skeleton argument dated 27 May 2021.

10. Ms Cunha argued that  "unduly  harsh"  in  the  sense  of  Exception  2
    contained in s117C(5) Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA
    02) is a high test.  Further, the FtT wrongly concluded that  XN  would
    have a similar upbringing to their mother (the  Respondent's  partner),
    based solely on the fact that XN's mother did not have  a  father  when
    growing up.  The Appellant submits that the FtT Judge did not  have  an
    evidential basis for  finding  that  the  Respondent's  partner  cannot
    afford to pay for their house without the Respondent's contribution  to
    the household income.  It was also argued that the FtT Judge failed  to
    consider why the working hours of the Respondent's partner (a  teacher)
    were incompatible with XN going to school or why alternative  childcare
    arrangements were inappropriate.

11. Ms Cunha argued that the FtT had failed to make a  holistic  assessment
    on the question of undue harshness, and had relied only on the evidence
    of the Respondent's partner.

12. In relation to Exception 1 contained in s117C(4) NIAA 02, Ms Cunha drew
    our attention to the comments of the Crown Court Judge when  sentencing
    the Respondent to 13 months imprisonment.  She submitted that  the  FtT
    Judge was required to take into consideration  the  complete  level  of
    offending.  The FtT Judge  failed  to  address  the  question  of  very
    significant  obstacles  properly,  including  failing  to  resolve  the
    factual dispute of whether the Respondent can speak Lingala.  The Judge
    also failed to address the point that the Respondent has a large family
    in the UK with a DRC cultural context (which would make  it  easier  to
    integrate on return).

13. Ms Cunha submitted that the FtT Judge identified there  was  an  art  3
    ECHR question to be resolved, but did not go on to resolve it.

14. In  response,  Dr  Chelvan  submitted  that  many  of  the  Appellant's
    submissions before us were submissions on facts in dispute and that  we
    should remember that we are deciding whether there was an error of  law
    in the decision of the FtT and  that  this  is  not  a  rehearing.   In
    addition, he submitted, arguments advanced for the Appellant  were  not
    raised on their application to appeal.

15. The FtT Judge made an assessment on the material and  arguments  before
    them at the time and we should be careful not to treat this matter as a
    rehearing based on new arguments that  the  Appellant  has  thought  of
    since.

16. Dr Chelvan submitted that the Appellant does not dispute [43] and  [44]
    of the FtT judgment, which conclude that the Respondent has  no  family
    in DRC, has not lived there as an independent adult, that the situation
    in the DRC is extremely  challenging  which  will  have  a  significant
    impact on the Respondent's ability to integrate and  establish  himself
    and that deportation would be akin to exile.

17. Dr Chelvan submitted that paragraph 4 of his skeleton argument for  the
    error of law hearing links to the art 3 ECHR argument.  That  paragraph
    points to the Home Office bundle page K4  which  is  a  UNCHR  response
    dated 18 December 2017 stating 'the SSHD had not  provided  'sufficient
    evidence allowing it to conclude... a fundamental  and  durable  nature
    there is no risk of persecution'.

18. We remind  ourselves  that  if  the  FtT  Judge  has  not  mentioned  a
    particular piece of evidence or a submission, this does not  mean  that
    they have not taken it into consideration.  Equally, we should not rush
    to find an error  of  law  simply  because  we  might  have  reached  a
    different conclusion, or might have expressed ourselves differently.

Analysis

FtT consideration of Exception 1 s117C NIAA 02

19. The Appellant states that the Judge failed to take  into  consideration
    the complete level of offending when assessing whether  the  Respondent
    was socially and culturally integrated into the UK, a prerequisite  for
    Exception 1 under s117C(4) NIAA.

20. The Appellant accepted in the FtT  [37]  that,  were  it  not  for  the
    offence leading to 13 months imprisonment, she would be in difficulties
    arguing that  the  Respondent  was  not  integrated  in  the  UK.   The
    Appellant's submission on a lack of integration was based on the single
    pillar of the criminal conviction.

21. The Judge dealt with the offending in two paragraphs.  The  Judge  took
    into consideration that the Respondent has always been lawfully present
    in the UK, had attended school here, worked with Transport  for  London
    and was trained as a plumber.

22. The evidence before the FtT included  the  sentencing  remarks  of  the
    Crown Court Judge.  In assessing integration, the FtT Judge  states  at
    [38] that they had taken into consideration all the evidence.  We  find
    that  this  includes  the  sentencing  remarks,   which   outline   the
    Respondent's level of offending within the context of the offence  very
    clearly.  It was not necessary for the FtT  to  repeat  the  sentencing
    remarks to make it clear that the level of  offending  had  been  taken
    into consideration.

23. The Judge gave a slightly more detailed exposition of the  Respondent's
    cultural and social integration. In our  judgment,  however,  this  was
    necessary in order to show what evidence the FtT Judge brought together
    when considering factors pointing towards integration in the UK.

24. We find that the Judge did take into consideration the  complete  level
    of offending.

25. In relation to the question under s117C(4)(c) of whether there would be
    very significant obstacles to the Respondent's  integration  into  DRC,
    the Appellant argued in her reasons for appealing that  the  FtT  Judge
    failed to consider that the Respondent had gained work  experience  and
    skills in the UK and speaks some French.

26. In oral submissions, Ms Cunha did not rely on  the  argument  that  the
    Respondent's ability to speak some French had not  been  considered  by
    the FtT Judge.  Instead, she advanced the argument that the  FtT  Judge
    failed to resolve a factual dispute on whether  the  Respondent  speaks
    Lingala.

27. Ms Cunha submitted that the Judge  highlighted  at  the  start  of  the
    determination that the Respondent can speak Lingala.   Contrary  to  Ms
    Cunha's submission, [19] of the  FtT  determination  records  that  the
    Appellant's case was that the Respondent  'understands  some  Lingala'.
    This is not at odds with the Judge's later recounting of evidence  that
    '[w]hilst he speaks a bit of French, he speaks no Lingala, which is the
    everyday language of the country' [42].  Given that a  person's  active
    knowledge of a language is invariably at least a  little  behind  their
    passive knowledge of a language (even in their first language), it  was
    not illogical for the FtT Judge to  accept  both  of  those  assertions
    about the Respondent's ability in Lingala.

28. We find that the FtT Judge did not fail to resolve  a  factual  dispute
    about the Respondent's command of Lingala, because  understanding  some
    Lingala and speaking no Lingala do not present a factual dispute.

29. With regards to the Appellant's submission that the FtT Judge failed to
    take into account that the Respondent has a large family in the UK with
    a DRC cultural context, it is correct to conclude that  the  Judge  did
    not use that turn of phrase in their determination.

30. The Judge did receive oral and written  evidence  on  the  Respondent's
    family background.  The Judge details [42]  that  they  heard  evidence
    about the Respondent being brought up by his uncle  and  being  like  a
    brother to his cousin (both of who provide a DRC cultural  link).   The
    Judge then outlines [43] how this is balanced against the lack  of  in-
    country links and familiarity with DRC.

31. The Judge could have addressed in more detail the question  of  whether
    there was a DRC cultural context in the Respondent's upbringing in  the
    UK, and could have gone further in  explaining  how  this  factored  in
    their analysis.  However, the Judge's weighing up of  the  factors  for
    and against this argument are sufficiently clear to address this  point
    properly.  We conclude that care has been taken by the  Judge  and  the
    evidence as a whole has been considered by the FtT  in  assessing  this
    point.

32. Accordingly, we conclude that the Judge has not erred in this respect.

FtT consideration of Exception 2 s117C(5) NIAA 02

33. The FtT determination at [29] explains that the Appellant took no issue
    with evidence that the Respondent's partner would find it difficult  to
    cope financially were the Respondent to be deported.  The Appellant did
    argue that this did not amount to undue harshness.

34. Before us the Respondent submitted that, on the evidence available, the
    Judge should not have concluded that  the  Respondent's  partner  would
    struggle financially.  Having considered this submission  we  conclude,
    on balance, that the Judge was entitled  to  conclude  there  would  be
    financial struggles.  Further, this properly feeds in  to  the  Judge's
    analysis of whether the impact on XN is unduly harsh.

35. On the impact of the Respondent's deportation on XN's  upbringing,  the
    Appellant correctly submits that there was no report by an  independent
    social worker to assist the  Judge.   Such  reports  are  routinely  of
    assistance when they are provided.  However, there is no obligation  to
    provide them to the Tribunal and they are not essential to  assess  the
    impact of a parent's deportation on a child.

36. The Appellant further submitted that the evidence of XN's mother  about
    her own upbringing was the sole source for the  Judge's  assessment  of
    the impact of deportation on XN's upbringing.  On reading  the  Judge's
    determination at [30-31], we take the view that this is not a  faithful
    representation of the Judge's analysis.

37. The Judge in fact considered the  evidence  of  both  the  Respondent's
    partner and the Respondent and, it seems to us,  also  drew  a  common-
    sense conclusion based on the evidence.

38. Therefore the FtT finding that deportation of the Respondent would have
    an unduly harsh effect on XN is not an error of law.

39. It is unclear, on the face of the FtT determination, what the basis was
    for the Judge's conclusion that the Respondent's partner would  not  be
    able to continue her  work  as  a  full-time  primary  school  teacher.
    However, given that the Judge was  justified  in  concluding  that  the
    effect of the Respondent's deportation would be  unduly  harsh  on  XN,
    this error is not material to the conclusion that Exception 2 was  made
    out.

FtT consideration of art 3 ECHR issues

40. The FtT Judge identified that the appeal concerned both art 3 and art 8
    arguments.  At [10] they noted that '[t]he appellant's case is that  to
    return to DRC would breach his Article 3 rights on  the  basis  of  the
    extreme poverty that he would face  there'.   Later,  at  [20-21]  they
    stated 'The crux of the claim before me is that it would be a breach of
    his Article 3 and 8 rights to return to the DRC...  I take the  Article
    8 claim first'.

41. The Judge analyses the art 8 claim from [21] through to the end of  the
    judgment.  The Judge does not, however, return to  address  the  art  3
    point.  Having identified that the appeal contained an art 3 issue that
    required resolving, the Judge was required - in our view  -  to  either
    resolve that issue, or make a finding as to why it was not necessary to
    resolve it.  To do neither has the effect of depriving both parties  of
    the opportunity for their case on that point to be  considered  by  the
    FtT.

42. We find that this does amount to an error of  law.   We  consider  that
    this error of law is one that makes it appropriate for the case  to  be
    remitted to the FtT for reconsideration.

Conclusion

43. Having identified that the case required an assessment of art 3 issues,
    the FtT Judge made a material error of law in not resolving this.

44. We therefore remit the case to the FtT.  The case is returned the  case
    to the same Judge, and confined to determining the art 3 ECHR point.

45. There are no other material errors of law.

Anonymity Order

46. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders we consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

Decisions and Directions

47. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for material error
    of law.

48. The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  It is returned to the
    same Judge, and confined to determining the art 3 ECHR point.

49. There is an order for anonymity.


Signed      D Cotton                               Date: 24 July 2021

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

