
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00024/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th January 2018                          |On 10th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR ATASI OSMAN SAID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sesay, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley promulgated  on  28th  September  2017  in
    which he allowed Mr Said's protection and human rights  appeal.   Given
    that this is the Secretary of  State's  appeal,  for  the  purposes  of
    clarity, in referring to the parties in this decision I shall refer  to
    the Secretary of State as 'the Secretary of State' and Mr Said who  was
    the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, will be  referred  to  as
    'the Claimant'.

    Factual background

 2. The Claimant is a citizen of Somalia who was  born  on  15th  September
    1996.  He left Somalia at the age of 8 and came  to  the  UK  with  his
    brother in December 2004, when he was aged  9.   At  the  date  of  the
    hearing before Judge O'Malley, he was  20  years  old.   Between  being
    granted asylum on 13th May 2005 and the  date  of  the  hearing  before
    Judge O'Malley, the Claimant had been convicted of a number of criminal
    offences which were set out by Judge O'Malley at paragraph [6]  of  her
    decision.  The convictions were:

    a) a conviction for  robbery  on  28th  January  2011,  for  which  the
       Claimant received a referral order of six months;

    b) on 12th April 2011, a conviction for robbery with a  referral  order
       of six months and �150 fine;

    c) on 5th July 2011, a further conviction  for  robbery,  the  Claimant
       receiving a detention order and training order of eight months;

    d)  on 19th August 2011, a conviction for robbery and battery with  the
       Claimant receiving a detention and training order of eight months;

    e) on 3rd January 2012 a conviction of four counts of conspiracy to rob
       with the Claimant receiving three years' imprisonment;

    f)  on 19th August a conviction for connection of possession of class B
       drug with the Claimant receiving a youth rehabilitation order:

    g) on 10th August, 2015, a conviction on two counts of  going  equipped
       for  burglary  and  assault,  the  Claimant  receiving   consecutive
       sentences of seven months and three months  in  a  young  offenders'
       institution.

 3.   Thereafter in February 2017  the  Claimant  received  a  caution  for
    possession of a class A drug.

 4. A notice of intention to make a deportation decision was issued on 14th
    January 2016 and a notice of intention  to  cease  refugee  status  was
    served on 13th April 2016.  On 27th January 2017 the Respondent made  a
    decision to deport and a decision  to  revoke  the  Claimant's  refugee
    status.

    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley

 5. In her  decision  Judge  O'Malley  considered  the  requirements  under
    Article 33 of the Geneva Convention, the exception under Article  33(2)
    in respect of someone who has been convicted by a final judgment  of  a
    particularly  serious  crime  and  who  constitutes  a  danger  to  the
    community  of  that  country,  and  also   considered   the   statutory
    presumption in Section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 that:

         "A person should be presumed to have  been  convicted  by  a  final
         judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
         to the community of the United Kingdom having been sentenced  to  a
         period of at least two years' imprisonment."

 6. However, Judge O'Malley went on to find that the presumption  had  been
    rebutted and found that there was no danger of repetition, such  as  to
    render the Claimant a danger to the community.  She  went  on  to  make
    findings in respect of the Claimant's asylum claim.  She found that his
    minority clan  membership  continued  to  put  him  at  risk  and  that
    therefore he continued to be  entitled  to  asylum.   She  went  on  to
    consider the claim under Article 3 and found that  the  Claimant  would
    not have access to significant financial resources upon return and that
    he would not be cushioned by funds from  the  UK.   She  was  also  not
    satisfied that he had significant prospects of  securing  a  livelihood
    upon return, as she found that he had no experience of working  in  the
    UK.  The Claimant  was  found  to  have  some  qualifications,  but  no
    experience in establishing himself in a home or  workplace.  The  Judge
    also took account of the fact that the Claimant  was  from  a  minority
    clan, which she considered to be a relevant factor in paragraph [88] of
    her judgment.  Judge O'Malley found there was a real  possibility  that
    the  Claimant  could  find  himself  in  conditions  that  fell   below
    acceptable humanitarian standards. She found that he could  still  rely
    upon Article 3, even if he was not entitled to refugee protection.

 7. Judge O'Malley in making her decision also went on to consider  Article
    8 of the ECHR and found in effect that the provisions  under  paragraph
    399A of the Immigration Rules were met. She went on to  find  that  the
    Claimant had been lawfully resident in the UK for the majority  of  his
    life at paragraph [92] of her judgment.  Judge  O'Malley  at  paragraph
    [93] found that he was socially integrated into the UK and at paragraph
    [96] found that there would be very  significant  difficulties  to  his
    integration into the country to which it is proposed the Claimant  will
    be deported, namely Somalia.

    The grant of permission to appeal

 8. On 20th November 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  granted
    the Secretary of  State  permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Hollingworth,
    having considered the Grounds of Appeal, found  that  it  was  arguable
    that Judge O'Malley had attached insufficient  weight  to  the  factors
    identified in the permission application, appertaining to the  question
    as to whether or not there would be a breach of Article 3. He found  it
    was arguable that the factors in favour  of  the  Claimant  securing  a
    livelihood on return had not  been  given  sufficient  weight  and  the
    factors militating against him securing of a livelihood upon return had
    been given excessive weight.  Judge Hollingworth went on to find it was
    arguable that Judge  O'Malley  had  unduly  discounted  the  degree  of
    financial support available to the Claimant from  the  United  Kingdom.
    Judge Hollingworth further  found  that  it  was  arguable  that  Judge
    O'Malley had attached insufficient weight to  the  Claimant's  criminal
    record when assessing his degree of integration into  the  UK  for  the
    purposes of Article 8.

    Discussion

    Certification and Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002

 9.  We  are  grateful  for  the  oral  submissions  made  by  both   legal
    representatives today, Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
    on behalf of the Secretary of State and Mr Sesay, Counsel on behalf  of
    the Claimant.  We have fully taken account of the submissions made both
    in the Grounds of Appeal and the Rule 24 response  and  also  the  oral
    submissions made by both legal representatives today.

10. Within the Grounds of Appeal the first  complaint  raised  against  the
    decision  of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   O'Malley   regards   her
    consideration of Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  Section 72 deals with the question of  refoulement  and  the
    exclusion of  protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention  for  serious
    criminals.  Section 72(1) states:

     "This Section applies for the purpose of construction and  application
    of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention (exclusion from protection)"



    and under Section 72(2):

         "A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
         judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
         to the community of the United Kingdom if he is-

          a) Convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

          b) Sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years."

    Pursuant to Section 72(6), a presumption under subsections (2), (3)  or
    (4) that a person constitutes a danger to the community  is  rebuttable
    by that person.

11. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued by  the  Secretary  of  State
    that the Claimant's propensity to commit robbery is an offence of  such
    seriousness that the presumption in  Section  72(2)  is  not  rebutted.
    Reliance is placed upon the Court of Appeal authority of Bulale v  SSHD
    [2008] EWCA Civ 806 in which, at [22] it was stated that:

         "Protecting members of society from violent crime, at  least  of  a
         sufficiently serious nature, is clearly a fundamental  interest  of
         that society.  Mr Bulale  by  his  propensity  to  commit  robbery,
         threatens that fundamental interest."

12. Judge O'Malley considered Section  72  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    certification at paragraphs [52] and [61] of her judgment.   She  noted
    in paragraph [52] how the Secretary of State had  decided  to  issue  a
    certificate in this case and therefore she began by  stating  that  she
    "must begin substantive deliberation on the appeal by  considering  the
    certificate".   She  noted  the  presumptions  in  Section  72(2)  were
    rebuttable by evidence, pursuant to Section 72(6) and referred  to  the
    Court of Appeal case of EN (Serbia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 630.  Judge O'Malley stated that:

         "It is for the appellant to show either that it  was  not  in  fact
         particularly serious, because of mitigating factors associated with
         its  commission,  or  that  because  there  is  no  danger  of  its
         repetition, that he does not constitute a danger to the community."

     She stated in paragraph [54] that:

         "If not rebutted by evidence she would find that  even  though  the
         appellant is a refugee because he would be at risk on  return,  his
         removal to Somalia would  nevertheless  not  be  a  breach  of  the
         Refugee Convention by virtue of the exception to the prohibition on
         refoulement set out in Article 33(2) of that Convention."

13. However, when considering that issue Judge O'Malley in  paragraph  [55]
    found that the only criminal sentence  which  supported  the  statutory
    presumption was the sentence  imposed  on  4th  May  2012.   We  remind
    ourselves that that was a conviction for conspiracy to rob, in  respect
    of which it is said the Claimant received  three  years'  imprisonment.
    Judge O'Malley stated that:

         "The evidence concerning the appellant's risk to the community, set
         out in the reasons for refusal letter is the fact of the conviction
         for two counts of conspiracy to rob which  led  to  the  concurrent
         sentence of three years' detention.  The sentencing remarks clarify
         that a group of young men agreed to commit the robbery, the spotter
         was particularly concerned to  notice  persons  who  were  elderly,
         female or both, who were withdrawing large sums in cash.   In  some
         cases unpleasant  injuries  were  caused  and  the  experience  was
         obviously deeply upsetting and frightening for the victims."

    In making  those  remarks  Judge  O'Malley  reiterated  the  sentencing
    remarks from the sentencing judge.

14. Judge O'Malley noted that the sentencing judge identified the  Claimant
    as being 'the spotter' in the gang.  She went on to find  at  paragraph
    56 that "there had been no attempt to remove the  appellant  after  the
    conviction because at the time he was only 16 years old".  She went  on
    to find that his criminal activity had been acquisitive and related  to
    drugs and that his most recent contact with the police was a caution in
    or around February 2017, relating to his personal use of Class A drugs,
    which she found was an escalation from his previous conviction relating
    to Class B drugs.  She found that there has been no escalation  in  his
    acquisitive offences since his conviction in 2012, nor had his  further
    actions led to sentences which would lead to  a  statutory  presumption
    that he constitutes a danger to the community.  She took  into  account
    his age at the date of conviction and stated in paragraph [59] that  he
    appeared before her as being an immature individual and  stated  "there
    is no evidence that he has flouted immigration bail  conditions,  there
    are no further convictions and only one caution  in  the  period  since
    release on immigration bail".

15. Judge O'Malley went on at paragraph [60] to find:

          "I find that the statutory presumption is rebutted,  I  find  that
         there is no  danger  of  its  repetition  such  as  to  render  the
         appellant  a  danger  to  the  community.   I  do  not  accept  the
         conclusion in the reasons for refusal letter, 'even a low  risk  of
         the repetition of this sort of offence poses an  unacceptable  risk
         of danger to  the  community  in  the  UK'  and  in  reaching  that
         conclusion  I  rely  on  Mugwaga   (s.72   -   applying   statutory
         presumptions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 338 (IAC)."

    She found that the presumption had been rebutted  and  the  appeal  had
    been wrongly certified.

16. Having listened carefully to the arguments that had been put forward on
    this issue,  we  find  that  the  reasoning  given  by  Judge  O'Malley
    regarding  whether  or  not  the  presumption  had  been  rebutted   is
    inadequate.  Her finding at paragraph [59] that "there are  no  further
    convictions and only  one  caution  in  the  period  since  release  on
    immigration bail" has to be considered in light of the  fact  that  his
    date of release from immigration bail was  in  June  2016,  just  eight
    months before the further caution for possession of Class  A  drugs  in
    February 2017. Moreover, in that regard, what the judge  has  seemingly
    failed to consider is that it was the conviction back in 2012 that  had
    given rise to the statutory presumption.  In formulating her reasons on
    that issue, Judge O'Malley has wholly failed to  take  account  of  the
    convictions subsequent to that, namely the conviction  in  August  2013
    for possession of a class B drug and significantly  the  conviction  in
    August 2015 for two counts of going equipped for burglary  and  assault
    and also thereafter the Claimant having received a caution in  February
    2017 for possession of class A drugs.

17. Judge O'Malley found at paragraph [57] of her  judgment  "his  criminal
    activity has been acquisitive and related to drugs" . The fact that  he
    had received a further conviction for possession of class  B  drugs  in
    August 2013 and a caution for  class  A  drugs  in  February  2017  are
    clearly relevant factors in determining whether  or  not  the  Claimant
    still constituted a danger to the community  and  whether  or  not  the
    presumption had been rebutted.  Drugs can be both highly addictive  and
    expensive. An addiction to drugs may well lead to  further  criminality
    to feed  any  such  habit.  Judge  O'Malley  has  failed  to  take  his
    subsequent criminality into account, when determining  whether  or  not
    the Claimant constitutes a danger to the community.

18. Her findings that he had not flouted immigration bail  conditions,  and
    had no further convictions and only one caution  in  the  period  since
    release on immigration bail, just  eight  months  previously  fails  to
    consider his entire criminal history and  in  particular  his  criminal
    history since the 2012 conviction.

19. There is also  another  concern  that  we  have  in  respect  of  Judge
    O'Malley's findings regarding Section 72.  In  paragraph  [60]  of  her
    judgment she states "I do not accept the conclusion in the reasons  for
    refusal letter, 'even a low risk of the  repetition  of  this  sort  of
    offence poses an unacceptable risk of danger to the  community  in  the
    UK'."  What she fails to take account of in that  regard  is  that  the
    more serious the offence, the lesser risk there has to  be  before  one
    still constitutes a danger to the community. Someone at a low  risk  of
    committing murder, for example, may still be someone who is a danger to
    the community.

20. We therefore do consider that the judge has made a  material  error  of
    law in regard to the certification question under  Section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Although  Judge  O'Malley
    went on to consider whether the Claimant was still entitled to  refugee
    status, that consideration was only relevant if her findings in respect
    of certification were well founded and adequately explained. They  were
    not.

    Consideration of the Article 3 claim

21. It is argued by Mr Sesay on behalf of the Claimant that Judge  O'Malley
    has properly considered the Article 3 claim and looked at it  in  light
    of the country guidance case of MOJ  &  Others  (Return  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442. He argues both in his Rule 24  reply  and
    in oral submissions that  the  judge  directed  herself  correctly  and
    identified that she was bound by the decision in MOJ.  He  argued  that
    the judge did not prefer the findings of UNHCR over MOJ  and  that  the
    findings the judge made were consistent with  subparagraphs  (vii)  and
    (xii) of the head note in MOJ.

22. In respect of MOJ, Judge O'Malley noted at  paragraphs  [82]  and  [83]
    that the Respondent relied on MOJ in the refusal  letter  and  repeated
    from the refusal letter "it is acknowledged that you have  been  absent
    from Somalia for a number of years... it is considered that  you  would
    have the option to access support from clan members...". Judge O'Malley
    went on at paragraph [83] to find:

         "I prefer the conclusion in MOJ that 'although a returnee may  also
         seek assistance from his clan members who are not close  relatives,
         such help is only  likely  to  be  forthcoming  for  majority  clan
         members, as minority clans may have little to offer'."

23. She went on to consider the US Report on Somalia from  2016  and  found
    that the Claimant arrived in the UK when he was  9  years  old,  coming
    from an area outside of Mogadishu; that he has been out of Somalia  for
    thirteen years and that he was a minority clan member.  She went on  to
    find that he would not have access to significant  financial  resources
    and that the Claimant had accepted the generosity of  his  brother  who
    houses and supports the Claimant in the UK.  However, she said that the
    evidence  before  her  did  not  indicate  the  Claimant's  family  had
    significant resources.  She found that his brother was a  taxi  driver;
    his mother was not working and his uncle owned a restaurant. She stated
    she was not persuaded that he would be "cushioned by funds from the  UK
    on return to Somalia".  Judge O'Malley further found that she  was  not
    persuaded that the Claimant had significant  prospects  of  securing  a
    livelihood upon return, as he had no experience of working  in  the  UK
    and although he had  some  qualifications,  he  had  no  experience  in
    establishing himself in a home or workplace and he is from  a  minority
    clan.  She found there was  a  real  possibility  that  "he  will  find
    himself in conditions that  will  fall  below  acceptable  humanitarian
    standards".

24. However, what she found to be relevant both in terms of the  revocation
    of refugee status and also  in  respect  of  her  considerations  under
    Article 3, was her finding in paragraph [78]  that  "I  find  that  his
    minority clan status continues to be the factor which puts him at  risk
    of persecution on return to Somalia".  In that regard  Judge  O'Malley,
    we find, has failed to consider the judgment of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    the country guidance case of MOJ, as reflected within the head note  at
    subparagraph (viii) that:

         "The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
         Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
         assist with access to livelihoods, performing less of a  protection
         function than previously. There are no clan militias in  Mogadishu,
         no clan violence, and no clan based discriminatory treatment,  even
         for minority clan members."

25. Judge O'Malley's finding in paragraph  [78]  that  "his  minority  clan
    status continues to be the factor which puts him at risk of persecution
    on return to Somalia" appears to us to be wholly inconsistent with  the
    judgment of the Upper Tribunal in MOJ.  She has not explained  why  she
    has failed to follow the country guidance case and  seemingly  has  not
    even taken account of it in reaching those findings.

26. Further, in consideration of the Article 3 issue, MOJ  is  relevant  in
    terms of the fact that under  subparagraph  (x)  of  the  headnote,  as
    reflected within the Grounds of Appeal it was stated that:

         "If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu after
         a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the
         city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will
         need to be a careful assessment of all of the circumstances.  These
         considerations will include, but are not limited to:

           . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

           . length of absence from Mogadishu;

           . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

           . access to financial resources;

           . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
             or self employment;

           . availability of remittances from abroad;

           . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;

           . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
             enables an Appellant to secure financial support on return."

27. The Upper Tribunal in MOJ went on at subparagraph (x) to say:

         "Put another way, it will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
         explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access   the   economic
         opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
         especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are
         taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away."

28. Mr Sesay relies upon the findings of the Upper Tribunal in subparagraph
    (vii) that a person returning to Mogadishu after the period of  absence
    will look to his nuclear family, if he has one, living in the city  for
    assistance in establishing himself in securing  a  living  and  that  a
    returnee may also seek assistance from clan members who are  not  close
    relatives, but that such help is only  likely  to  be  forthcoming  for
    majority clan members, as minority clans  may  have  little  to  offer.
    Although Judge O'Malley makes reference to that  subparagraph  she  has
    not taken account of all the factors set out in subparagraph (ix).  MOJ
    sets out considerations that  the  Tribunal  has  to  consider.   Judge
    O'Malley has not fully done so.  She has considered some of  them,  but
    not all.  Although it is not said to be an exclusive list  of  factors,
    they are nonetheless factors which should be taken into  account.   She
    has not, for example, taken account of his ability to fund his  journey
    to the West.  Nor has she explained pursuant to  subparagraph  (x)  why
    the Claimant will not be able  to  access  the  economic  opportunities
    produced by the economic boom, especially in terms of returnees  taking
    jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.

29. We therefore find that Judge O'Malley's consideration under  Article  3
    also contains a material error of law. It cannot be said that she would
    necessarily have reached the same outcome  had  such  errors  not  been
    made.

    Article 8

30. Finally, in respect of Article 8, Judge O'Malley dealt with that  issue
    between paragraphs [90] and [98] of her  decision.   It  has  now  been
    conceded by Mr Sesay on behalf of the Claimant that Judge O'Malley  did
    err at paragraph [93] of her decision when she found:

         "I find that he is socially and culturally integrated into the  UK,
         noting his presentation at the hearing and the  evidence  that  his
         development has been in the UK  prison  estate  which  I  find  may
         further diminish  his  cultural  ties  with  Somalia.   Whilst  his
         evidence is that he has no command of Somali languages,  I  do  not
         accept that position.  I prefer to accept his evidence that  he  is
         with his mother 5 days a  week  and  that  her  first  language  is
         Somali."

31. Clearly the question as to whether someone is socially  and  culturally
    integrated into the UK  has  to  take  into  consideration  a  person's
    criminal convictions within the UK. This Claimant had a whole  plethora
    of  criminal  convictions,  including  numerous  convictions  for  both
    robbery and for drug offences, throughout the period between  2011  and
    2017.  Nowhere within  her  consideration  as  to  the  extent  of  his
    cultural and social integration for the purposes of paragraph  399A  of
    the Immigration Rules does Judge O'Malley take  such  convictions  into
    account and Mr Sesay now quite properly concedes that the judge was  in
    error in that regard.

32. Moreover, there is a further error that Judge O'Malley has made in  her
    consideration of Article 8.  It is this.  In respect of paragraph  [96]
    of her judgment she states that:

         "I  remind  myself  that  finding  very  significant   difficulties
         requires the appellant to pass  a  significant  hurdle,  but  I  am
         satisfied in this case that he can meet that hurdle and indeed,  at
         his current age and in the  circumstances  set  out  for  returning
         minority clan members above, I would find that he has a very strong
         claim indeed."

33. The difficulty with that finding, we consider  to  be,  is  that  again
    Judge O'Malley erroneously relied upon  the  Claimant's  minority  clan
    membership as, in itself, being the factor that put him  at  risk  upon
    return, contrary to the judgment in MOJ.

34. We therefore do find that the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Malley does contain material errors of law  and  we  set  aside  that
    decision in its entirety.

35. We find that a significant amount of fact-finding will be necessary  at
    any rehearing and that it is appropriate for the case  to  be  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal, for rehearing  before  any  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley.

Notice of Decision

36. The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Malley  does  contain
    material errors of law and is set aside in its entirety.  We remit  the
    case back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  before  any  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley.

37. No anonymity direction is made in this case, no such direction was made
    by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  no  application  for  anonymity
    direction has been made before us.

Signed                                  Date 30th January 2018

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
