
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00063/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Justice                          |                                 |
|On 9 March 2020                  |                     On 18 May   |
|                                 |2020                             |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                 rso (iraq)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Nadeem, legal representative of MJ Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  His date of birth is  given  as  1
    January 1980.  He is a Sunni Muslim of Kurdish  ethnicity  from  Kirkuk
    City in northern Iraq.  He appeals against a decision which was  issued
    by the respondent on 24  June  2019.   On  that  date,  the  respondent
    revoked the appellant's status as a refugee, refused his claim that  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom would be in breach of the  country's
    international obligations and signed a deportation order against him.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemborough
    on 12 August 2019.  In a decision which was sent to the  parties  on  5
    September 2019, Judge Hemborough  dismissed  his  appeal.    The  judge
    noted that the appellant had entered the United  Kingdom  in  2000  and
    that he had been granted Indefinite Leave to Remain as a refugee  later
    that year.  He had accrued 9 convictions for 13 offences  between  2002
    and 2016.  On 9 September  2016,  he  was  sentenced  to  seven  years'
    imprisonment at Peterborough Crown Court for a conspiracy to  supply  a
    drug of Class A (Cocaine).  As a result of this offence, the respondent
    initiated deportation proceedings against the appellant and  there  was
    an exchange of correspondence between the  appellant's  representatives
    and the respondent.  In the decision under  challenge,  the  respondent
    considered the representations made by the appellant's  solicitors  and
    the letter she had received from the UNHCR, each  of  which  urged  the
    respondent not to revoke the  appellant's  protection  status,  amongst
    other submissions.

 3. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  his  British  partner.
    Amongst other matters, their evidence concerned the  partner's  ability
    to cope with their six British children without the appellant  and  the
    risk to the appellant on return to Iraq after such a long absence.  The
    appellant was asked questions about his ability to return  to  Iraq  in
    2015, when he had returned in order to see his ailing mother.

 4. At [38]-[50], the judge found that the appellant had been convicted  of
    a particularly serious crime and  that  he  had  failed  to  rebut  the
    presumption that he represented a danger to the community of the United
    Kingdom for the purposes of Article 33(2) of  the  Refugee  Convention.
    Applying section 72 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, therefore, he found that the appellant fell to be  excluded  from
    international and humanitarian protection.

 5. At [51]-[56], the judge considered the respondent's decision to  revoke
    the appellant's protection status.  He noted that the basis upon  which
    the appellant had secured asylum (fear of Saddam Hussein and the Ba'ath
    Party) had fallen away and that the appellant had returned to  Iraq  in
    2015.  He considered that the appellant - who had  travelled  with  his
    partner and his six children to Iraq - had no subjective fear  when  he
    returned to his country of nationality  for  a  significant  period  of
    time.  He took note of what was said by the UNHCR but  found  that  the
    appellant could no longer continue to refuse to avail  himself  of  the
    protection of the country of his nationality.  In any event, the  judge
    found, the appellant had so availed himself when he obtained a national
    passport in 2015 and travelled on that passport to Iraq.

 6. At [57]-[75], the judge  considered  the  appellant's  claim  that  his
    deportation would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.   He  considered  that
    claim with reference to the statutory framework in Part 5A of the  2002
    Act.  He  concluded  that  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  upon  the
    appellant's partner or children for him to be deported.  The judge  did
    not accept that the appellant had been living in the UK for most of his
    life, or  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration in  Iraq.   He  did  not  accept  that  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those set out in the  statutory
    exceptions to deportation.

 7. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The appeal came before a panel comprising Lord Matthews  and
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.  On 15 January 2020, the  Upper  Tribunal
    issued a decision in which it found that the judge of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal had erred in law in failing  to  consider,  in  light  of  the
    background material and the available  country  guidance,  whether  the
    appellant, as a Sunni Kurd from Kirkuk, could  be  returned  safely  to
    Iraq without breaching the respondent's international obligations.  The
    Upper Tribunal emphasised at the conclusion of that decision  that  the
    remaining findings were preserved.  So it  was  that  the  appeal  came
    before Judge Perkins and me on 9 March 2020, for the  decision  on  the
    appeal to be remade with many of the F-tT's findings preserved.

 8. We heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant,  who  adopted  a  short
    statement which had been prepared specifically for the hearing.  He was
    cross-examined briefly by Mr Clarke and we asked some questions for the
    purposes of clarification.   We  will  return  in  due  course  to  the
    evidence given orally and in writing, setting out as much of it  as  is
    necessary to explain our findings of fact.

Submissions

 9. Mr Clarke relied on the respondent's decision insofar  as  it  remained
    relevant.  The appellant's evidence before the F-tT had  been  recorded
    at [20] of its decision.   Paragraphs  [4]  and  [5]  of  the  original
    grounds of appeal were also relevant to the Tribunal's assessment.  The
    respondent confirmed that the appellant would be returned  to  Baghdad.
    It was accepted on all sides, in light of the guidance given in  SMO  &
    Ors (Iraq) CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC), that the appellant  would  require
    either a CSID or an INID in order to survive in Iraq or  to  travel  to
    his home area.  The appellant had not been  truthful  in  his  evidence
    about his CSID or his ability to acquire such a document.  In the event
    that he did not have one, he could obtain  a  CSID  from  the  consular
    facilities in the UK, as considered in SMO and AA  (Iraq)  [2015]  UKUT
    544 (IAC) , at [173]-[177] in particular.  The appellant had  suggested
    that he had no contact with his family in Iraq  but  this  was  plainly
    untrue.  He had never before suggested that his family had  disappeared
    and it was little short of baffling that such matters would  have  been
    overlooked if they were true.  They could assist him in getting a  CSID
    if he required one.  The family would  also  be  in  Kirkuk  and  could
    provide him with a support network.

10. In the event that the appellant required a CSID, the  burden  was  upon
    him to show that the CSA office in  Kirkuk  was  not  operational:  SMO
    (Iraq) refers.  The extent of the damage to that city was considered at
    [254]-[257] of the country guidance decision.  It was  plain  that  the
    majority of those at risk  were  from  the  security  services  or  the
    administration.   The  only  relevant  risk  category  into  which  the
    appellant falls is that he is Kurdish but Kirkuk was said in SMO to  be
    an ethnically diverse area.  Whilst there were Shia emblems  and  other
    such problems in the area, it remained the case  in  this  appeal  that
    there was no evidence of Kurds being targeted.  There was no reason  to
    think that the appellant would be rendered destitute.  His adherence to
    Sunni Islam was a  factor  to  consider  in  light  of  the  up-to-date
    evidence but the appellant had failed to adduce any such evidence.   He
    had failed, in the circumstances, to establish a  claim  to  protection
    under Article 15 of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 ECHR.

11. Mr Nadeem submitted that the appellant had his Iraqi passport and would
    be returned to Baghdad.  The likelihood of obtaining a replacement CSID
    by proxy had been reduced as a result of the introduction of  the  INID
    system: [431] of SMO refers.  It was plausible that the appellant,  who
    has been in the United Kingdom for a good many years,  would  not  have
    the details necessary in order to obtain a replacement.  In the absence
    of a CSID, the appellant would be at risk throughout  Iraq,  and  would
    not even be able to travel to Kirkuk from Baghdad.

12. We reserved our decision.

Analysis

13. The appellant's entitlement to protection under the Refugee  Convention
    was determined by the First-tier Tribunal and the  appeal  was  rightly
    dismissed on that basis.  So too was his  principal  contention,  which
    was that deportation would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.  What remains
    is the appellant's contention that his removal would be  in  breach  of
    Article 3 ECHR and that he is entitled to Humanitarian  Protection  and
    Article 15(b) or 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.   Article  15(b)
    and Article 3 ECHR are essentially coterminous in a case such as  this.
    In each respect, the appellant bears the burden of proof,  albeit  that
    the standard is the lower one applicable to protection claims.

14. It is agreed on both sides that  the  appellant  will  be  returned  to
    Baghdad but that his home area is Kirkuk, 150 miles north of the  point
    of return.  Amongst other questions, we must consider the risk  to  the
    appellant in his home area and his ability to  return  there.   Certain
    matters are not challenged by  the  respondent.   In  addition  to  the
    appellant originating from Kirkuk, it is accepted that he is of Kurdish
    ethnicity and that he is a Sunni Muslim.   Certain  other  matters  are
    most certainly in issue, including  the  location  of  the  appellant's
    family and the extent of the Civil Status documentation he possesses or
    is able to obtain.

15. In respect of  both  of  those  issues,  we  find  that  the  appellant
    attempted to deceive us in his most recent witness  statement  and  his
    oral evidence.  At [5] of that statement, the appellant claimed that he
    had lost contact with his family since he had returned from his trip to
    Iraq in 2015.  As Mr Clarke noted in  his  able  submissions,  however,
    there had been no mention of this  loss  of  contact  at  any  previous
    stage.  The appellant was cross-examined at some length before the FtT.
     There is a good record of his oral evidence in the decision reached by
    the FtT.  He was asked about the circumstances  which  awaited  him  in
    Kirkuk.  The judge's record of his evidence, at [21] of that  decision,
    makes no reference to the appellant having lost touch with his  family.
    Nor is there any such suggestion  in  the  detailed  witness  statement
    which was before the FtT.

16. Before us, Mr Clarke asked the appellant when he had  lost  touch  with
    his family.  He said that it had been  during  the  time  that  he  was
    prison in the UK.  Mr Clarke  suggested  to  him  that  he  would  have
    mentioned this earlier if it was true.  The  appellant  merely  averred
    that he was telling the truth.  We do not accept his  account.   As  Mr
    Clarke submitted, he would have mentioned  the  fact  that  he  was  no
    longer in contact with his family if that were true.  We consider  that
    the appellant lied in this respect in an attempt to  bolster  the  only
    claim he has remaining; that he would be at  risk  on  return  to  Iraq
    because he has no documentation and no family support structure.

17. As for the second question of fact which arises before us, we find that
    the appellant also lied in  his  witness  statement  and  in  his  oral
    evidence before us.  He claimed in his most  recent  witness  statement
    that he does not have a CSID.  In his oral evidence, he stated that  he
    had returned to Iraq using his British 1951 Convention Travel  Document
    and that he had obtained an Iraqi  passport  when  he  arrived  in  the
    country.  He said that he had presented his British documents and  that
    he had been granted an Iraqi  passport  by  the  Civil  Status  Affairs
    office in Kirkuk, which had at that time been under Kurdish control.

18. This account is to be considered in the context of the situation  which
    obtained in Iraq when  the  appellant  returned  there  in  2015.   The
    importance of the CSID  document  has  been  emphasised  in  all  Iraqi
    country guidance decisions from MK (Iraq) [2012] UKUT 126 (IAC) to  SMO
    (Iraq) [2019] UKUT 400  (IAC).   We  traced  the  development  of  that
    country guidance at [336]-[349] of our decision in SMO (Iraq).  It  is,
    and has been for many years, necessary to have  either  a  CSID  or  an
    alternative form of Iraqi identity document in order to move around  in
    that country.  In 2015, Iraq was in the grip of  ISIL.   The  need  for
    individuals to present a CSID in order to travel within Iraq  was  writ
    large at that stage, just as it is now.  The appellant  would  not,  in
    our judgment, have been able to travel from his  point  of  arrival  in
    Iraq to Kirkuk without a CSID.  There is no  conceivable  way  that  an
    individual would have been able  to  travel  to  Kirkuk,  whether  from
    Baghdad or from the  IKR,  using  a  document  issued  by  the  British
    authorities.

19. The reality is that the appellant would either have had a  CSID  before
    he travelled to Iraq or that his family obtained one for him before  he
    arrived in that country.  Of those two possibilities, we  consider  the
    latter considerably more likely.  The appellant had been in the UK  for
    many years and may not have had a CSID.  On deciding to return  to  see
    his family, however, the need for a CSID would have been made clear  to
    him and he would, we find have secured one with the assistance  of  his
    relatives, via the process described in both AA (Iraq) and SMO  (Iraq).
    That card would either have been sent to him in the UK or presented  to
    him by his family when he arrived in  Iraq,  thereby  enabling  him  to
    travel to Kirkuk.

20. We do not accept, therefore, that the appellant had  no  CSID  when  he
    returned to Iraq in 2015.  Even if he remained in  his  mother's  house
    for much of the time that he was there  (due  to  the  threat  of  ISIL
    around Kirkuk at that time), he would not have been able to  reach  the
    family home without a civil status document.  Nor do we accept that the
    appellant no longer has that document.  As would have been explained to
    him, and as is clear from the country guidance to which we have alluded
    above, it is an important document and would have been retained by  the
    appellant on  return.   We  do  not  consider  the  appellant  to  have
    discharged the burden upon him of establishing that he has no CSID  and
    no family support in his home area of Kirkuk  for  these  reasons.   We
    find that the appellant would return to Baghdad  International  Airport
    holding a valid Iraqi passport (a copy of which is at Annex  B  of  the
    respondent's bundle) and a CSID.  He would be able to  use  the  latter
    document (but not the former, SMO refers at  [380])  to  make  his  way
    through the numerous checkpoints on the way from Baghdad to Kirkuk.

21. As set out in SMO, Kirkuk is no longer an area  in  which  there  is  a
    general risk of treatment contrary to Article 15(c) of the QD.  As also
    noted in SMO, however, that is by no  means  the  end  of  the  enquiry
    required by that Article.  It also falls to us to consider, against the
    recent backdrop provided by that country guidance decision, whether the
    appellant would be at enhanced risk owing  to  the  presence  of  other
    factors which are relevant to the 'sliding scale' analysis required  by
    the jurisprudence of the CJEU and the domestic courts.

22. Mr Clarke  made  reference  to  the  two  most  relevant  factors:  the
    appellant's Kurdish ethnicity and his Sunni Muslim faith.  It  was  not
    suggested by Mr Nadeem  that  other  factors  were  applicable  in  the
    appellant's case, and the parts of SMO which he set out verbatim and at
    length in his skeleton argument seemed to focus our attention on  these
    points.  It was not suggested, in particular, that  the  appellant  has
    any actual or perceived link  to  ISIL.   Nor  was  it  suggested,  for
    example, that he is a Westernised individual or that he has  any  links
    with the security or administrative apparatus,  whether  in  Kirkuk  or
    more widely.

23. The appellant does engage the second bullet point at [5] of the country
    guidance, since his religious and ethnic identity means that he is  (in
    Kirkuk, at least) a member of an ethnic or religious group which is not
    in de facto control of the place of return.  As is apparent from  [25]-
    [50] of SMO, Kirkuk is an ethnically diverse area in which the  Popular
    Mobilisation Units inflame ethnic  tension  by  the  erection  of  Shia
    emblems and the renaming of Kurdish sites.  We also note the references
    in that decision to ISIL's ability to target the  city  itself;  it  is
    present and active in the governorate: SMO refers, at [252].

24. Whilst the appellant's ethno-religious  identity  is  relevant  to  the
    sliding scale analysis, we do not consider that his status as a Kurdish
    Sunni suffices to tip the balance for us to conclude that he  would  be
    at risk of treatment contrary to Article 15(c).  As a Kurd, he is  less
    likely to fall under suspicion of being a member of ISIL because of his
    Sunni faith; the Kurds generally fought against ISIL, not for  it.   He
    has a support structure in Kirkuk, where his family remains.  There  is
    no suggestion that he or his family has ever suffered as  a  result  of
    their Kurdish ethnicity or their Sunni religious adherence and there is
    no evidence before us to show that the downward trend of violence noted
    at [251]-[257] of SMO has changed.  Considering the matter as a  whole,
    we do not consider that the appellant would be  at  risk  of  treatment
    contrary to Article 15(c) in his home area.

25. Nor, having reached the primary findings of fact we have reached above,
    do we consider that the appellant would be at risk of destitution so as
    to breach Article 15(b) or Article 3 ECHR.  He has a support  structure
    in Kirkuk, which was not in any event a city which was worst hit by the
    battles against ISIL in the period 2014 to 2017.  He has a CSID, and he
    will be able to access the support packages  which  are  in  place,  as
    documented in SMO.  As a Sunni Kurd, the appellant will be  in  a  less
    advantageous position than others but he is fit and well and can expect
    support from family, the Iraqi government  and  NGOs.   These  are  not
    circumstances which begin to cross the  high  threshold  considered  at
    [213]-[219] of SMO.

26. Drawing all of  these  threads  together,  we  summarise  the  findings
    reached  by  the  FtT  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  a   whole.    The
    circumstances which led to the appellant's  recognition  as  a  refugee
    have ceased to exist and he is no longer a  refugee.   He  committed  a
    particularly serious crime in the United Kingdom and  he  represents  a
    danger to this country.  He cannot, on any view, benefit or continue to
    benefit from the protection of the 1951 Convention.  His removal  would
    not be contrary  to  Article  8  ECHR  since  the  public  interest  in
    deportation outweighs his family life with his wife and children.   His
    removal would not be contrary to Article 15 of  the  QD  or  Article  3
    ECHR.  He may, in summary, be deported from the United Kingdom  without
    this country being in breach of its international obligations.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.  No anonymity direction is made.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
         Date 04 May 2020

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
