
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00024/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th March 2019                   |On 19th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Chuna, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Aziz of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appealed  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bird promulgated on 25 May 2018 in which AS' appeal  was
    allowed on asylum grounds and also on Article 3  and  Article  8  human
    rights grounds.  In a decision promulgated on 25 May  2018,  the  Upper
    Tribunal found an error of law in that decision, set it aside and  gave
    directions for the re-hearing of the appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  The
    background to this appeal is set out  in  the  error  of  law  decision
    annexed and will not be repeated herein save as where  necessary.   For
    ease I continue to refer to the parties as they were before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, with AS as the Appellant and the Secretary of  State  as
    the Respondent.

Immigration Law and Rules Relevant to the Appellant

 2. So far as relevant to this appeal, section 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007 states that a foreign criminal is a person who is  not  a  British
    Citizen, who is convicted in the  United  Kingdom  of  an  offence  and
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12  months.   Section
    32(5) of that Act requires the Secretary of State to make a deportation
    order in respect of a foreign criminal unless one of the exceptions  in
    section 33 applies.  The  first  exception  is  where  removal  of  the
    foreign criminal would breach  his  or  her  rights  protected  by  the
    European Convention on Human Rights or would place the  United  Kingdom
    in breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention.

Refugee Convention & cessation

 1. It is for an Appellant to show that he is a refugee.  By Article  1A(2)
    of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person  who  is  out  of  the
    country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a well-founded fear
    of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality or membership
    of a particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is  unable  or
    unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of the  country  of
    origin.

 2. The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.   This  was  expressed  as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the Appellant were to be returned.

 3. Under the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, a person  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
    refugee if they fall within the definition set out in Article 1A of the
    Refugee Convention (see above) and are not excluded by Articles 1D,  1E
    or 1F of the Refugee Convention  (Regulation  7  of  the  Qualification
    Regulations).

 4. Article 1C of the Refugee Convention provides that the Convention shall
    cease to apply to any person falling under the terms of  section  A  if
    "(5) He can no longer, because the  circumstances  in  connection  with
    which he has been  recognised  as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,
    continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection of the country of
    his nationality; Provided that this paragraph shall   not  apply  to  a
    refugee falling under section A(1) of  this  article  who  is  able  to
    invoke compelling reasons  arising  out  of  previous  persecution  for
    refusing  to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the  country  of
    nationality."

 5.  Article  11  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC   (the   Qualification
    Directive) deals with the same issue as follows:

         "1.  A third-country national or a stateless person shall cease  to
         be eligible for subsidiary protection when the circumstances  which
         led to the granting of subsidiary protection status have ceased  to
         exist or have changed to such a degree that protection is no longer
         required.

         2.   In applying paragraph 1, Member States shall  have  regard  to
         whether the change in circumstances is of such  a  significant  and
         non-temporary  nature  that  the  person  eligible  for  subsidiary
         protection no longer faces a real risk of serious harm."

 6. Finally, paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules also deals  with  this
    issue in (v) as follows:

         "(v) he can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
         which he has been recognised as a refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,
         continue to refuse to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the
         country of nationality."

 7. Paragraph 339A goes on to state that, "In considering (v) and (vi), the
    Secretary  of  State  shall  have  regard  to  whether  the  change  of
    circumstances is of such a significant and  non-temporary  nature  that
    the refugee's fear of persecution can no  long  be  regarded  as  well-
    founded."

 8. The Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v  MA
    (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994, further to the CJEU decision  in  Joined
    Cases C-175/08, C-176/08, C-178/08, C-179/08, Aydin Salahadin  Abdulla,
    Kamil  Hasan,  Ahmed  Adem,  Hamrin  Mosa  Rashi   &   Dier   Jamal   v
    Bundesrepublik Deutschland, 2 March 2010, concluded that: "A  cessation
    decision is the mirror image of a decision determining refugee  status.
    By that I mean  that  the  grounds  for  cessation  do  not  go  beyond
    verifying  whether  the  grounds  for  recognition  of  refugee  status
    continue to exist.  Thus, the relevant question is  whether  there  has
    been a significant and non-temporary change in  circumstances  so  that
    the circumstances which caused the person to be a refugee  have  ceased
    to apply and there is no other basis on which he would be held to be  a
    refugee.  The recognising  state  does  not  in  addition  have  to  be
    satisfied that the country of origin has a system of government  or  an
    effective legal system for protecting basic human  rights,  though  the
    absence of such systems may of course lead to  the  conclusion  that  a
    significant  and  non-temporary  change  in   circumstances   has   not
    occurred." [paragraph 2(1)].

 9. Although in MS (Art 1C(5) Mogadishu (Somalia) [2018] UKUT 196 (IAC) the
    Upper Tribunal found that the Respondent is not  entitled  to  cease  a
    person's refugee status  pursuant  to  article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention solely on the basis of a change of circumstances in one part
    of the country of  proposed  return;  this  was  before  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in MA (Somalia) referring to the symmetry  between  a
    decision determining refugee status and  cessation.   In  AMA  (Article
    15(c) - proviso - internal relocation) Somalia [2019]  UKUT  11  (IAC),
    the Upper Tribunal found that changes in a refugee's country of  origin
    affecting only part of the country may, in principle, lead to cessation
    of refugee status, albeit it  is  difficult  to  see  how  in  practice
    protection could be said to be sufficiently fundamental and durable  in
    such circumstances.

Certificate under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
2002

 3. Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  applies
    for the purposes of construction and application of  Article  33(2)  of
    the Refugee Convention as to exclusion from protection.   Section 72(2)
    states as follows:

         "A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
         judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
         to the community of the United Kingdom if he is -

          a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

          b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years."

 4. Further to section 72(10), where a Tribunal hears an appeal  against  a
    Respondent's certificate under subsection (2) above under section 82 of
    this Act, it "(a) must begin substantive deliberation on the appeal  by
    considering the certificate, and (b) if in agreement that  presumptions
    under (2) ... apply (having given  the  appellant  an  opportunity  for
    rebuttal) must dismiss the appeal in so far as it relies on the  ground
    specified in (9)(a)" which relates to an appeal on the grounds that  to
    remove the appellant would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention.

 5. In accordance with the Upper Tribunal decision in Essa  (Revocation  of
    protection status appeals) [2018] UKUT 244 (IAC), where section  72(10)
    applies, an appeal to the  Tribunal  must  be  dismissed  even  if  the
    Refugee Convention grounds are made out.

Country Guidance

 6. The parties are both agreed that the Country  Guidance  in  MOJ  &  Ors
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) is  applicable
    to the present appeal and neither party seeks any  departure  from  it.
    The key findings for the purposes of this appeal as summarised  in  the
    headnote, with additional cross-referencing to the original  paragraphs
    numbers in the main body of the decision given in square  brackets  for
    ease of cross referencing to relevant  paragraphs  in  later  decisions
    below:

          i) The country guidance issues addressed  in  this  determination
             are not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in AMM
             and others (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
             Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445  (IAC).  Therefore,  where  country
             guidance has been given by the Tribunal in AMM in  respect  of
             issues not addressed in this determination then  the  guidance
             provided by AMM shall continue to have effect.

         ii) Generally, a person who is "an ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
             associated with the security forces; any aspect of  government
             or  official  administration  or  any  NGO  or   international
             organisation) on returning to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
             absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk of  harm
             such as to require protection under Article 3 of the  ECHR  or
             Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  In  particular,
             he will not be at real risk simply on account of having  lived
             in a European location for a period of time  of  being  viewed
             with  suspicion  either  by  the  authorities  as  a  possible
             supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab  as  an  apostate  or
             someone whose Islamic integrity has been compromised by living
             in a Western country. [paragraph 407(a)]

        iii) There has been durable change in the sense that the Al Shabaab
             withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and  there  is  no  real
             prospect of a re-established presence within  the  city.  That
             was not the case at the time of the country guidance given  by
             the Tribunal in AMM. [paragraph 407(b)]

         iv) The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-military
             casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab  target  groups
             such as politicians, police officers, government officials and
             those associated with NGOs  and  international  organisations,
             cannot be precisely established by  the  statistical  evidence
             which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it is established
             by the evidence considered as a whole that there  has  been  a
             reduction in the level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
             largely due to the cessation of confrontational warfare within
             the city and Al Shabaab's resort to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
             carefully selected targets.  The present level  of  casualties
             does not amount to a sufficient  risk  to  ordinary  civilians
             such as to represent an Article 15(c) risk. [paragraph 407(c)]

          v) It is open to an  ordinary  citizen  of  Mogadishu  to  reduce
             further still his personal exposure to the risk of "collateral
             damage" in being caught up in an Al Shabaab  attack  that  was
             not targeted at him by avoiding areas and establishments  that
             are clearly identifiable as likely Al Shabaab targets, and  it
             is not unreasonable for him to do so.  [paragraph 407(d)]

         vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab  for
             civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for recent returnees
             from the West.  [paragraph 407(e)]

        vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence will
             look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,
             for assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing  a
             livelihood.  Although a returnee may also seek assistance from
             his clan members who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is
             only likely to be forthcoming from majority clan  members,  as
             minority clans may have little to offer.  [paragraph 407(f)]

       viii) The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has  changed.
             Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms  and
             assist with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
             protection  function  than  previously.   There  are  no  clan
             militias in Mogadishu, no clan  violence,  and  no  clan-based
             discriminatory treatment,  even  for  minority  clan  members.
             [paragraph 407(g)]

         ix) If it is accepted that a person  facing  return  to  Mogadishu
             after a period of absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             the circumstances.  These considerations will include, but are
             not limited to:

                . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure:

                . length of absence from Mogadishu;

                . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

                . access to financial resources;

                . prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                  employment or self-employment;

                . availability of remittances from abroad;

                . means of support during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
                  Kingdom;

                . why his ability to fund the journey to the West no  longer
                  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on
                  return.  [paragraph 407(h)]

          x) Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away. [paragraph 407(h)]

         xi) It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms.  [paragraph 408]

        xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those who
             originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to live
             in the city without being subjected to an Article  15(c)  risk
             or facing a real risk of  destitution.   On  the  other  hand,
             relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority  clan  with
             no formal links to the city, no access to funds and  no  other
             form of clan, family or  social  support  is  unlikely  to  be
             realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home  and
             some form of ongoing financial support there will  be  a  real
             risk of  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
             accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
             prospect of having to live in conditions that will fall  below
             acceptable humanitarian standards.  [paragraphs 424 and 425]

Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights

 7. In terms of the Article 3 threshold to be applied, the present case  is
    not a "paradigm" case as in MSS v Belgium &  Greece  53  EHRR  28.   As
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Said [2016] EWCA  Civ  442,  Article  3  was  intended  to
    protect persons from violations of their civil  and  political  rights,
    not their social and economic rights.  The return of a person  who  was
    not at risk of harm because of armed conflict or violence would not  in
    the  case  of  economic  deprivation  violate  Article  3  unless   the
    circumstances were such as those  in  N  v  UK  [2005]  2  AC  296  (as
    summarised by Lady Justice Arden in paragraph  34  of  MA  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ  994).   The
    main conclusion on this point in Said is at paragraph 18  which  states
    as follows:

         "These cases demonstrate that to succeed in  resisting  removal  on
         article 3 grounds on the basis of suggested poverty or  deprivation
         on return which are not the responsibility of the receiving country
         or others in the sense described in para  282  of  Sufi  and  Elmi,
         whether or not the feared deprivation is contributed to by  medical
         condition, the person liable to deportation must show circumstances
         which bring him within the approach of the Strasbourg Court in  the
         D and N cases."

 8. There is some concern expressed by the Court of Appeal in  Said  as  to
    possible conflation between  factors  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    internal relocation, humanitarian protection  and  Article  3  in  MOJ,
    which need to be set out in full.  The discussion is at  paragraphs  26
    to 31 which states as follows:

         "26. Paragraph 407(a) to (e) are directed to the issue that  arises
         under article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Sub-paragraphs
         (f) and (g) establish  the  role  of  clan  membership  in  today's
         Mogadishu, and the current absence of  risk  from  belonging  to  a
         minority clan.  Sub-paragraph (h) and paragraph 408 are  concerned,
         in broad terms, with the ability of a returning Somali national  to
         support himself.  The conclusion at the end of paragraph 408 raises
         the possibility of a person's circumstances failing below what  "is
         acceptable in humanitarian protection terms".  It is, with respect,
         unclear whether that is a  reference  back  to  the  definition  of
         "humanitarian  protection"  arising  from   article   15   of   the
         Qualification Directive.  These factors do not  go  to  inform  any
         question under article 15(c).   Nor  does  it  chime  with  article
         15(b), which draws on the language of article 3 of the  Convention,
         because the fact that a person might be returned to  very  deprived
         living conditions, could not (save in  extreme  cases)  lead  to  a
         conclusion that removal would violate article 3.

         ...

         28.   In  view  of  the  reference  in  the  paragraph  immediately
         preceding para 407 to the UNHCR  evidence,  the  factors  in  paras
         407(h) and 408 are likely to have  been  introduced  in  connection
         with internal flight or internal relocation arguments, which was  a
         factor identified in para 1 setting out the  scope  of  the  issues
         before UTIAC.  Whilst they may have some relevance in a search  for
         whether a removal to Somalia would give  rise  to  a  violation  of
         article 3 of  the  Convention,  they  cannot  be  understood  as  a
         surrogate for an examination  of  the  circumstances  to  determine
         whether such a breach would occur.  I am unable to accept that if a
         Somali national were able to bring himself  within  the  rubric  of
         para 408, he would have established that  his  removal  to  Somalia
         would breach article 3 of the Convention.  Such an  approach  would
         be inconsistent with  the  domestic  and  Convention  jurisprudence
         which at para 34 UTIAC expressly understood itself to be following.

         29.  Having set out its guidance, UTIAC  then  turned  to  consider
         IDPs, about which each of the experts had given some evidence.   It
         recognised that  the  label  was  problematic  because  there  were
         individuals who are considered as internally displaced persons  who
         have settled in a new part of Somalia in "a reasonable standard  of
         accommodation" and with access to food, remittances from abroad  or
         an independent livelihood.   UTIAC  considered  that  the  position
         would be different for someone obliged to live in an IDP camp,  the
         conditions  of  some  of  which  "are  appalling",  para  411.   It
         continued by quoting from evidence of armed attacks on  IDP  camps,
         of  sexual  and  other  gender  based  violence  and  the  forcible
         recruitment of internally displaced children into violence,  albeit
         that it  did  not  accept  the  evidence  it  quoted.   UTIAC  also
         mentioned overcrowding, poor  health  conditions  and  (ironically)
         that  the  economic  improvements  in  Mogadishu  were  leading  to
         evictions from IDP camps in urban centres with  vulnerable  victims
         being unable to seek refuge elsewhere.

         30.  It  is  immediately  apparent  that  the  discussion  of  this
         evidence, which  is  culled  from  expert  reports,  understandably
         touches on concerns about violence, which in article 3 terms  would
         be analysed by reference to the approach in MSS and Sufi  and  Elmi
         cases, and aspects of  destitution,  which  would  be  analysed  by
         reference to the approach in the N and  D  cases.   The  conflation
         continues in para 412:

             "Given what we have  seen,  and  described  above,  about  the
             extremely harsh living  conditions,  and  the  risk  of  being
             subjected to a range of human rights abuses, such a person  is
             likely to found to be living  at  a  level  that  falls  below
             acceptable humanitarian standards."

             Having further discussed the contradictory evidence about  how
             many people lived in IDP camps,  UTIAC  concluded  that  "many
             thousands of people are reduced to living in circumstances  of
             destitution" albeit that there was no reliable figure  of  how
             many people lived in  such  destitution  in  IDP  camps.   The
             determination continued:

                  "420.    Whilst it  is  likely  that  those  who  do  find
                  themselves living in inadequate makeshift accommodation in
                  an IDP camp will be experiencing adverse living conditions
                  such as to engage the protection of article 3 of the ECHR,
                  we do not see that it gives rise to  an  enhanced  Article
                  15(c) risk since there is an insufficient nexus  with  the
                  indiscriminate violence which, in any event, we have found
                  not to be at such a high level that all civilians  face  a
                  real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm.   Nor  does  the
                  evidence support the claim that there is an enhanced  risk
                  of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab for those in  the  IDP
                  camps or that such a person is more likely to be caught up
                  in an Al Shabaab attack ...

                  421. Other than those with no  alternative  to  living  in
                  makeshift accommodation in an IDP camp,  the  humanitarian
                  position in Mogadishu has continued to improve  since  the
                  country guidance in AMM  was  published.   The  famine  is
                  confined to history ... The "economic boom" has  generated
                  more opportunity for employment and  ...  self-employment.
                  For many returnees remittances will be important ...

                  422. The fact that we have rejected the view that there is
                  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  or  ill
                  treatment to civilian returnees in Mogadishu does not mean
                  that no Somali  national  can  succeed  in  a  refugee  or
                  humanitarian protection or article  3  claim.   Each  case
                  will fall to be decided on its  own  facts.   As  we  have
                  observed, there will need to be a  careful  assessment  of
                  all the circumstances of a particular individual."

         31.  I entirely accept that some of the observations  made  in  the
         course of the discussion of IDP camps may be taken to suggest  that
         if a returning Somali national can show that he is likely to end up
         having  to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP  camp,  that  would  be
         sufficient to engage the protection of article 3.  Yet such a stark
         proposition of cause and effect  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
         article  3  jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  Court  and  binding
         authority of the domestic courts.  In my judgement the position  is
         accurately stated in para 422.  That  draws  a  proper  distinction
         between humanitarian protection and article 3 and  recognises  that
         the individual  circumstances  of  the  person  concerned  must  be
         considered.  An appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person
         concerned would face impoverished conditions of living  on  removal
         to Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated  in  Sufi  and
         Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the N case.
          Impoverished conditions which were the direct  result  of  violent
         activities may be viewed differently as would cases where the  risk
         suggested is of direct violence itself."

 9. Paragraph 422 of MOJ stated:

         "The fact that we have rejected the view that there is a real  risk
         of persecution or serious harm or ill  treatment  to  civilians  or
         returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that no  Somali  national  can
         succeed in a refugee or humanitarian protection or Article 3 claim.
          Each case will fall to be decided on its own facts.   As  we  have
         observed, there will need to be a careful  assessment  of  all  the
         circumstances of a particular individual."

10. The question of whether the risk of deprivation on return would lead to
    a violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights was
    revisited in MA (Somalia).  Lady Justice  Arden,  being  bound  by  the
    decision in Said, confirmed that there is no violation of Article 3  by
    reason of a person being returned  to  a  country  which  for  economic
    reasons  can  not  provide  him  with  basic  living  standards.    The
    Respondent in MA contended that the situation in  Somalia  was  brought
    about by conflict, which is recognised by the European Court  of  Human
    Rights as an exception to the analysis.   Lady  Justice  Arden  however
    concluded at paragraph 63 that:

         "... It is true that there has historically been severe conflict in
         Somalia, but, on the basis of MOJ, that would  not  necessarily  be
         the cause of deprivation if the respondent were returned to Somalia
         now.  The evidence is that there is no present reason why a person,
         with support from his family and/or prospects of employment, should
         face unacceptable living standards."

11. It is well established that in Article 3 cases where the  risk  to  the
    individual is not from treatment emanating from intentionally inflicted
    acts of the public authorities in the receiving state or from those  of
    non-State bodies in that country when the authorities there are  unable
    to afford him appropriate protection; it is only  in  very  exceptional
    circumstances that there would  be  a  violation  of  Article  3.   The
    principles are summarised by the European Court of Human Rights in N as
    follows:

         "42. Aliens who are subject to expulsion cannot in principle  claim
         entitlement to remain in the territory of a  contracting  state  in
         order to continue to benefit from medical, social or other forms of
         assistance and services provided by the expelling state.  The  fact
         that the applicant's circumstances, including his life  expectancy,
         would be significantly reduced if he were to be  removed  from  the
         contracting state is not sufficient  in  itself  to  give  rise  to
         breach of art 3.  The decision to remove an alien who is  suffering
         from a serious mental or physical illness to a  country  where  the
         facilities for the treatment of that illness are inferior to  those
         available in the contracting state may raise an issue under art  3,
         but only in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds
         against the removal are  compelling.   In  D  v  UK  ...  the  very
         exceptional circumstances were that the  applicant  was  critically
         ill and appeared to be close to death, could not be guaranteed  any
         nursing or medical care in his country of origin and had no  family
         there willing or able to care for him or provide him  with  even  a
         basic level of food, shelter or social support.

         43.  The court does not  exclude  that  there  may  be  other  very
         exceptional cases where the humanitarian considerations are equally
         compelling.  However, it considers that it should maintain the high
         threshold set in D v UK ... and applied in its subsequent case law,
         which it regards as correct in principle, given that in such  cases
         the alleged future harm would emanate not from the intentional acts
         or omissions of public authorities or non-state bodies, but instead
         from a naturally occurring  illness  and  the  lack  of  sufficient
         resources to deal with it in the receiving country.

         44.  ... Advances in medical  science,  together  with  social  and
         economic differences between countries, entail that  the  level  of
         treatment available in the Contracting State  and  the  country  of
         origin may vary considerably.  While it  is  necessary,  given  the
         fundamental importance of Article 3 in the Convention  system,  for
         the Court to retain a degree of flexibility to prevent expulsion in
         very exceptional cases, Article 3 does not place an  obligation  on
         the Contracting State to alleviate  such  disparities  through  the
         provision of free and unlimited healthcare to all aliens without  a
         right to stay within its jurisdiction.  A finding to  the  contrary
         would place too great a burden on the Contracting States."

Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights

12. The requirements where a person claims that their deportation would  be
    contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under  Article  8  of  the
    European convention on Human rights in so far as they are  set  out  in
    the Immigration Rules and relate to this appeal are:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

          a) ...

          b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

          c) ... the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not,  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will   only   be
             outweighed by other factors where there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399
             and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
         if -

          a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

               i) the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                   a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and

                   b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

          b) the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and

               i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

              ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and

             iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
                  UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

          a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and

          b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

13. By virtue of section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, Part V of that Act applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts breaches Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and
    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

14. Section 117B applies to the public interest considerations in all cases
    and section 117C applies additional considerations to  cases  involving
    foreign criminals.  So far as relevant to  this  appeal,  section  117B
    sets out factors to be considered  in  all  cases  and  the  additional
    consideration in cases involving foreign criminals provides as follows:

         "117C. Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

          2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

          3) In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

          4) Exception 1 applies where -

               a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

               b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

               c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

          5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."

15. In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53, the Supreme Court considered the test for and  factors  to  be
    taken into account when assessing the  meaning  of  'unduly  harsh'  in
    paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules  and  section  117C(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In  paragraph  23,  Lord
    Carnworth held as follows:

         "On the other hand the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   Further  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of "harshness", that is a level which may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
         the deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in  my  view
         (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is
         a balancing of the relative levels  of  severity  of  the  parent's
         offence, other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the
         section itself by reference to length of sentence.   Nor  (contrary
         to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR
         240, paras 55, 64) can it be equated with the requirement  to  show
         "very compelling reasons".  That would be in  effect  to  replicate
         the additional test applied by  section  117C(6)  with  respect  to
         sentences of four years or more."

16. Within the Supreme Court's consideration of the specific appeal in  KO,
    further reference is made to the authoritative guidance on the  meaning
    of unduly harsh given in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), which held in paragraph 46:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something more severe,
         or bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  and  comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."





The Appellant's Immigration and criminal history

17. The Appellant left Somalia in 1995 and went to Kenya with other  family
    members due to persecution by Hawiye clan members; which  included  the
    Appellant's aunt, brother and grandfather being killed because of their
    clan affiliation.  The Appellant and his family went to a refugee  camp
    in Kenya but continued to be persecuted there due  to  their  ethnicity
    and over time, family members used  agents  to  travel  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

18. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom with his brother  in  December
    2004, at the age of nine, having left Somalia at the age of eight.   He
    was granted asylum on 30 May 2005 on the basis that he, along with  his
    other family members, were at risk of persecution in Somali as minority
    clan members.

19. On 28  January  2011,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  robbery  and
    sentenced to a referral order for six months.  Whilst on bail for  this
    offence, he was further convicted of a separate offence of  robbery  on
    12 April 2011, for which his referral order was  extended  and  he  was
    ordered to pay compensation �150.

20. On 5 July 2011, the Appellant was convicted of robbery and sentenced on
    19 August 2011 to a detention and training order for a period of  eight
    months.  He was sentenced on the same date for an  offence  of  battery
    with a concurrent four-month detention and training order.

21. On 4 May 2012, the Appellant was sentenced to three years' imprisonment
    for his conviction of four counts of conspiracy to rob.

22. On 19 August 2013, the Appellant  was  convicted  of  possession  of  a
    controlled drug, namely class B cannabis/cannabis resin  and  sentenced
    on 4 September 2013 to a youth rehabilitation order, costs and a victim
    surcharge.

23. On 23 June 2015, the Appellant was  convicted  of  going  equipped  for
    burglary and for an offence of battery, for which he was sentenced on 7
    September 2015 to 7 months and a consecutive three months  in  a  Young
    Offenders Institution, and ordered to  pay  a  victim  surcharge.   The
    Appellant was released from this period of custody on 6 June 2016.

24. On 27 April 2017, the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  three  counts  of
    possession of a controlled  drug,  namely  the  class  A  drugs,  crack
    cocaine and heroin, and the class B drug  of  cannabis/cannabis  resin,
    for which he was sentenced to a conditional discharge of 18 months  and
    subject to payment of costs and a victim surcharge.

25. The Appellant was notified of  the  Respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation decision on 14 January 2016 and a notice  of  intention  to
    cease his refugee status was served on  him  on  13  April  2016.   The
    Respondent's decision to deport  and  revoke  the  Appellant's  refugee
    status is dated 27 January 2017.

Explanation for refusal

26. In the decision letter dated 27 January 2017, the Respondent decided to
    revoke the Appellant's refugee status and  refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim.  In relation to revocation of refugee  status,  the
    Respondent determined that in accordance with paragraph 339A(v) of  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 1C(5)  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  the
    Appellant's refugee status  could  be  ceased  because  he  no  longer,
    because  of  circumstances  in  connection  with  which  he  had   been
    recognised as a refugee ceased to exist, continue to  refuse  to  avail
    himself  of  the  protection  of  his  country  of  nationality.    The
    Respondent stated that there had been a fundamental  and  non-temporary
    change in Somalia such that he would no longer risk treatment amounting
    to persecution on return, essentially  that  there  was  no  clan-based
    persecution in Mogadishu.

27.  The  Respondent  indicated  that  representations  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and from the UNHCR have been taken into  account  within  the
    decision,  as  was  the  country  guidance  in  MOJ.   The   Respondent
    considered that there would not  be  a  breach  of  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights, if the Appellant were returned  to
    Mogadishu.   The  Appellant  is  a  male  in  reasonable   health   who
    assimilated into a foreign culture when coming to  the  United  Kingdom
    and would be able to re-assimilate to Somali culture  on  return.   The
    Respondent considered that the Appellant had  sufficient  ties  to  his
    home  country,  including  language,  cultural  background  and  social
    network, to be able to re-adapt to life in Somalia and form an adequate
    private life in that country.  Further, the Appellant's  skills  gained
    during his time in the United Kingdom, including in  English  language,
    would assist him in  gaining  lawful  employment  in  Somalia  with  an
    enhanced prospect of the same in light of the findings in MOJ.

28. Next, the Respondent considered the presumption in section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and found that it  applies
    to the Appellant as he had been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  a
    serious offence, with a sentence of imprisonment of at least two years.
     Reference is made to the Sentencing Remarks in May 2012.  It  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant had  rebutted  the  presumption,  with  the
    Respondent concluding that the  Appellant  remained  a  danger  to  the
    community and was likely to reoffend in the future.  The Appellant  did
    not qualify for a grant of humanitarian protection and in any event was
    precluded from such a grant by paragraph 339D(iii) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

29. Finally, the Respondent considered the Appellant's right to respect for
    private and family life under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human  Rights  through  the  prism  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    The
    Respondent did not accept that the  Appellant  had  established  family
    life in the United Kingdom for the purposes of Article 8 as  there  was
    no evidence of additional dependency beyond normal emotional ties  with
    his mother and adult siblings.  It was accepted that the Appellant  had
    established private life in the United Kingdom, having lived  here  for
    13 years, but not that he was socially and culturally  integrated  here
    given the extent of his criminality.  The  nature  of  the  Appellant's
    offending was regarded as anti-social behaviour against  the  community
    which may have caused a serious long-term impact on  the  victims.   It
    was not accepted that the Appellant's presence in  the  United  Kingdom
    was an indication of integration and the Appellant  had  been  excluded
    from society for significant periods during  his  custodial  sentences.
    The Appellant was not in employment, nor financially independent.

30. Further, the Appellant would not face very significant obstacles to his
    reintegration to Somalia, where he lived until the  age  of  eight  and
    where he retains knowledge of the culture and customs.   The  Appellant
    could use the skills and experience gained in  the  United  Kingdom  to
    seek employment and support himself on return, and there would  not  be
    very significant obstacles to his reintegration even if  the  Appellant
    has no family ties or connections in  Somalia.   The  Appellant  is  an
    adult in good health, is not estranged  from  the  language  spoken  in
    Somalia and he is likely to have a network of support on return.

31. In these  circumstances  none  of  the  exceptions  to  deportation  in
    paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules applied and further there  were
    no very compelling circumstances to outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.

The Appellant's claim

32. In his original statement of evidence form dated  25  April  2005,  the
    Appellant gave his name, date of birth and nationality.  He states that
    he was born in the island of Brava and comes from the Bravanese  tribe,
    a minority clan in Somalia.  In Somalia the Appellant  lived  with  his
    mother, father, four brothers and two sisters but following  deaths  in
    the wider family by people from the Hawiye tribe, the Appellants  whole
    family moved in 1995 to Kenyan, where their living conditions were poor
    and they continued to be persecuted.  From 1999 to 2004,  the  children
    of the family fled and came to the United Kingdom where they  were  all
    granted refugee status.  There is no mention of the Appellant's parents
    after he himself left Kenya at  the  end  of  2004  in  the  statement,
    although from later documents it is  clear  that  his  mother  and  two
    further family members arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2006  and  in
    2013, the Appellant's father's whereabouts were  unknown,  although  he
    was believed to still be in Kenya.

33. In his written statement signed and dated 23 April 2018, the  Appellant
    updates the position from his previous statement.  He  states  that  he
    has not reoffended since February 2017 and has been  clean  from  drugs
    for the previous six months because he wanted to change his life.   The
    Appellant realises the harm that his drugtaking and criminal  behaviour
    has done to other people and he is truly sorry for this.

34. The Appellant has been in a relationship since September  2017  with  a
    Somali national who has refugee status in the United Kingdom and  leave
    to remain here until October 2018.  The Appellant's partner was at  the
    date of the statement pregnant and he would like to marry her once in a
    position to do so.

35. At the age of 12 or 13, the Appellant started hanging out with  a  gang
    of older boys who encouraged him to do petty  crime  such  as  robbery,
    from which he was given a small part of the  proceeds.   The  Appellant
    started taking drugs around the age of 15, influenced by  those  around
    him who were also all taking drugs and he became stressed and  in  need
    of money.  The Appellant stated  that  he  was  not  a  danger  to  the
    community and the United Kingdom.  His conviction in 2012  was  because
    he acted as a spotter and although he did not personally harm anyone he
    accepts that people were injured because of his actions, for  which  he
    is sorry.  The  Appellant's  convictions  after  2012  were,  he  says,
    because he was mixing with sorts of people,  which  he  accepts  is  no
    excuse, but he is also sorry for these offences as well.  The Appellant
    has not had contact with these people for over a year  and  he  has  no
    intention of communicating with them further.

36. The Appellant claims to be at risk on return  to  Somalia  because  his
    skin colour is lighter than most Somalian's and  because  of  his  clan
    affiliation.  The Appellant speaks a little bit of Bravanese but he has
    no contacts or family in Somalia having left there at the age of eight.
     The Appellant's brother gives him money for essentials but neither  he
    nor any of his other family members would be able  to  support  him  in
    Somalia and they would  not  be  able  to  return  there  either.   The
    Appellant thinks that he is unlikely to get a job on return because  he
    doesn't speak the language and would be too afraid to  approach  anyone
    for work or accommodation to avoid becoming a  target.   The  Appellant
    has no work experience and no relevant qualifications  for  employment.
    The Appellant considers that he would be  a  stranger  in  Somalia  and
    treated with suspicion there.  He  is  fully  integrated  into  British
    society having not been in Somalia since 2004/2005.

37. The Appellant attended the oral hearing, adopted his written statements
    and gave oral evidence in English.  He stated that his son was born  on
    19 September 2018 and he sees him every  day,  being  involved  in  all
    aspects of his care  and  having  been  present  for  his  birth.   The
    Appellant's son lives with his partner and he lives separately with his
    brother, partly because that is the address to which he is  bailed  and
    partly because the couple do  not  want  to  live  together  until  the
    Appellant has sorted out his immigration status  and  employment.   The
    Appellant's partner has just been granted indefinite  leave  to  remain
    and hopes to apply for British citizenship after a year.   She  is  not
    able to return to Somalia.

38. The Appellant stated that his family would not be able to  provide  him
    with any financial support on return to Somalia  as  they  are  already
    struggling financially.

39. For the past 18 months the Appellant has been  clean  from  drugs.   He
    stated that he has changed his life and is now looking for a chance  to
    prove himself and be a proper role model to his son.

40. In cross-examination, the Appellant  stated  that  he  has  been  in  a
    relationship for about two years.  His partner is Somalian and has been
    in the United Kingdom since 2009, having arrived with  her  mother  and
    siblings and has no family remaining in Somalia.  The Appellant was not
    sure whether his partner was a refugee (although his written  statement
    says that she is) or precisely when she obtained  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, other than it was after their son was  born.   The  Appellant's
    partner had not attended the oral hearing because she was with the baby
    and had prepared a statement for the last hearing only.  The  Appellant
    has met his partner's family, with his partner translating for  him  to
    speak to her mother as she only speaks Somali.

41. The Appellant has not returned to Somalia since he left.  In the United
    Kingdom he has all of his mother's family, including his maternal uncle
    and no family remaining in Somalia.  The Appellant last  spoke  to  his
    father about eight years ago  and  has  not  seen  him  since  he  left
    Somalia.  The Appellant's mother speaks Bravanese at home  rather  than
    Somali and the Appellant's Bravanese is failing.

42. The Appellant is not currently able to provide  any  regular  financial
    support for his partner or  child,  who  are  themselves  supported  by
    public funds.  The Appellant would not be able  to  support  them  from
    Somalia either as he does not think that he would be able to survive or
    seek employment there.

43. I asked the Appellant further questions.  He stated that  he  was  from
    Brava in Mogadishu and his father remained in Somalia when he left.  As
    to his offending, the Appellant stated that he would  not  reoffend  as
    his mentality had changed.  He no longer speaks to people  he  used  to
    hang around with and his focus is now on his family, to  make  his  mum
    proud and be a good role model for his son.  The Appellant is trying to
    change his life and learn more about his religion.

Closing submissions

44. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Chuna relied on the reasons for refusal
    letter dated 27 January 2017.

45. In relation to the section 72 certificate, the Appellant is someone who
    has been convicted of a sufficiently serious crime to give rise to  the
    presumption that he poses a risk to the public.  His offences were  for
    drugs and robbery; he is a persistent offender and continued  offending
    despite an earlier guilty plea.   It was submitted that  the  Appellant
    showed a total disregard for the criminal law and his local  community.
    There is no reason why the Appellant is no longer a risk to the public,
    a recent lack of reoffending is not sufficient of itself to  show  that
    the presumption has been rebutted.  The Deportation Order is a  current
    deterrent against further offending.

46. As to whether the Appellant continued to pose a risk to the public, the
    Respondent relies specifically on the latest sentencing  remarks.   The
    Appellant was trained for professional  robbery  at  a  young  age  and
    continued offending with  an  increasing  severity  of  offences.   The
    offending was so serious that a custodial sentence was required,  which
    reflects the threat posed to the community.  The Appellant  remains  in
    the same environment as before, has shown willingness and  capacity  to
    commit offences and reoffend, such that his deportation is conducive to
    the public good.

47. The Appellant's last offence was for  drugs  and  there  were  previous
    serious offences over a lengthy period during  which  he  had  multiple
    opportunities to reform.  He stated  that  he  wanted  to  change  when
    pleading guilty to an offence in 2012 but carried  on  offending.   The
    Appellant's history shows that he reoffends  when  incentives  such  as
    custody or bail  are  removed.   It  was  submitted  that  he  poses  a
    continuing risk to the public and has a propensity  to  reoffend.   The
    Appellant is subject to a current incentive not to  offend,  being  the
    Deportation Order.  Although it is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  has
    family in the United Kingdom now, his previous offending has  been  for
    money, as a choice rather than from gainful employment and despite  the
    fact he's already been subject to lengthy periods of custody  and  risk
    of  deportation,  he  previously  failed  to  address   his   offending
    behaviour.  It is not accepted  that  his  current  family  life  would
    prevent further offending, given  that  the  Appellant's  support  from
    family members, including his uncle, was not sufficient previously.

48. The country guidance in the case of MOJ was relied upon,  in  which  it
    was shown there had been significant changes in Mogadishu  since  2006.
    The Appellant has no links to the security system of administration  in
    Somalia, he identifies as a Somali man, with increasing involvement  in
    his religion maintaining Islamic integrity and  on  return  to  Somalia
    would not be seen as an outsider given that  he  speaks  Bravanese  and
    understands Somali.  The country guidance confirmed that Al-Shabaab  no
    longer poses a threat to civilians in Mogadishu and  the  Appellant  is
    not at risk on return of forcible recruitment, nor on the basis of clan
    membership.

49. The Appellant's evidence in relation to whether  his  girlfriend  could
    return to Somalia to continue family life with him there is unclear and
    no documents have been produced in  relation  to  her  or  this  issue.
    There is in particular no written statement from her and no evidence to
    show that they are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  There  is
    also a lack of evidence as to the Appellant's  child's  status  in  the
    United Kingdom and unclear whether he holds indefinite leave to  remain
    or some other form of leave as a  dependent  of  his  mother.   In  any
    event, it would be not  be  unduly  harsh  on  either  the  Appellant's
    partner or his son to remain in the  United  Kingdom  without  him  and
    there are  no  very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  very
    significant public interest in deportation of the Appellant.

50. On behalf of the Appellant, the  skeleton  arguments  which  have  been
    submitted over the course of these appeal proceedings were relied upon.
     First, in relation to the section 72 certificate,  the  Appellant  has
    consistently stated that at a young age he was caught up in a  criminal
    gang with criminal activity and although he tried  to  move  away  from
    this, he didn't manage to do so.  The Appellant has shown a high  level
    of remorse for a long period of time  and  other  than  a  caution  for
    possession of drugs in 2017, his last sentence  was  imposed  in  2015.
    The Appellant has been clean of drugs  and  has  not  reoffended  since
    2017, showing that he  is,  as  claimed,  a  reformed  character.   The
    Appellant now has established family life with a girlfriend and son and
    wants to pursue family life as part of a unit with them.  The Appellant
    wants to get married and says that having a son has changed  his  life.
    In these circumstances, it  has  not  been  shown  that  the  Appellant
    continues to be a risk to the public  given  the  lack  of  any  recent
    offending and his life changes since.

51. Secondly, in relation  to  the  Respondent's  decision  to  revoke  the
    Appellant's refugee status, the Appellant maintains that he is a member
    of a minority clan and as such would  be  targeted  and  persecuted  on
    return.  He would be identified as Bravanese by  his  skin  colour  and
    language spoken.  The Appellant left Somalia in 2004, has not  returned
    since, and he has  no  family  and  no  support  there.   Although  the
    Appellant's bundles and earlier skeleton arguments  included  reference
    to and copies  of  background  evidence  in  relation  to  Somalia,  no
    specific reliance was placed on any of its contents by  Counsel  during
    oral submissions.  It  was  confirmed  by  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that the country guidance in MOJ is applicable to this appeal
    and that the Appellant was  not  seeking  any  departure  from  it,  by
    reference to the background material submitted or  otherwise.   It  was
    accepted that the Appellant was from Mogadishu and would not be at risk
    on return there.

52. Thirdly, in relation to Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights, the Appellant relies on the risk of  destitution  and  inhumane
    treatment on return to Somalia on the basis that he has no contacts  or
    family there, he has been absent since 2004, he does not  speak  Somali
    (although it is accepted that he  speaks  Bravanese  and  English)  and
    would be homeless on return.

53. Finally, in relation to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights, the Appellant relies on the relationship with his  partner  and
    child in the United Kingdom, his partner being a refugee  from  Somalia
    (said to have derived her status from her mother)  and  who  has  since
    been granted indefinite leave to remain.  It  was  submitted  that  she
    would be unable to return to Somalia with the Appellant and if  he  was
    returned it would be difficult for her to even visit there which  would
    cause significant problems in their relationship and would prevent  the
    Appellant from being a father to his son.  The likely lack of resources
    available to the  Appellant  on  return  would  make  even  maintaining
    communication  with  his  family  in  the  United  Kingdom   difficult.
    Overall, it was submitted that taking into account the  best  interests
    of the child and the Appellant's partner's and child's right to  family
    life, that the grave impact of removal  on  all  of  the  family  would
    amount to very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public interest
    in deportation in the present case.

Findings and reasons

10. Although a Tribunal is normally required to begin the determination  of
    an appeal with  substantive  consideration  of  the  certificate  under
    section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002;  given
    that the circumstances of this case involve a decision on cessation  of
    Refugee status, I begin with that part of the decision before going  on
    to deal with the certificate.

Refugee Convention & Cessation

11. As a starting point, it is necessary to be clear on where the Appellant
    is from in Somalia so as to assess risk and whether there  has  been  a
    significant and  non-temporary  change  in  his  home  area  and/or  to
    determine whether internal relocation is  an  option,  for  example  to
    Mogadishu if that is not the home area.

12. In his screening interview, the Appellant stated that he  said  he  did
    not know where he was born, albeit in his statement of evidence form he
    stated that he was born on the  Island  of  Brava  and  that  his  last
    address in Somali was in Mpayi, Brava.  Later, in his questionnaire  in
    response to the Respondent's request for information on 20  June  2013,
    prior to making a decision on whether the Appellant should be deported,
    the Appellant stated that he was born in Mogadishu, as were his  mother
    and father.  In submissions dated 22 April 2016, it is  said  that  the
    Appellant was not aware that Brava and Mogadishu were separate  places,
    thinking Mogadishu was another name for Somalia and the  Appellant  has
    little knowledge of the geography in Somalia.  At this point, he stated
    that he was born in Brava.  However, at  the  oral  hearing,  Counsel's
    submissions were on the accepted basis  that  the  Appellant  was  from
    Mogadishu.

13. Although the Appellant's position has been inconsistent over time as to
    where he was originally from or where he was last living in Somalia,  I
    find on the basis of Counsel's submissions at the oral hearing that the
    Appellant is from Mogadishu, or at least was last living  in  Mogadishu
    before he  left  Somalia.   Counsel's  submission  and  my  finding  is
    reinforced by the nature of  Counsel's  submissions  that  followed  in
    relation to the application  of  MOJ  to  the  Appellant  returning  to
    Mogadishu (rather than on the basis of internal relocation  there)  and
    submissions made on conditions there in relation to Article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights (rather than on the basis  that  it
    would be unduly harsh to internally relocate).

14. Counsel for the Appellant further accepted that the Appellant would not
    be at risk on return  to  Mogadishu  for  a  Convention  reason.   This
    submission is wholly consistent with the findings in MOJ that a  person
    who is an ordinary citizen would not be at risk on return to  Mogadishu
    by reason of absence abroad, the general security situation there, from
    forced recruitment by Al-Shabaab or for any  reason  relating  to  clan
    membership.

15. In MOJ, the Upper Tribunal found that there had been durable change  in
    Mogadishu, in the sense that the Al-Shabaab withdrawal was complete and
    there was no real prospect of a re-established presence within the city
    and further that the significance of clan membership in  Mogadishu  has
    changed.  At the time of that decision, it was found that there are  no
    clan militias in Mogadishu, there was no clan  violence  and  no  clan-
    based discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.   These
    are the findings in 2014 based on evidence from  the  preceding  years,
    which remain binding today, five years later,  and  neither  party  has
    suggested any departure from  the  country  guidance  case.   In  these
    circumstances, I find that  there  has  been  a  significant  and  non-
    temporary change in circumstances, at least in Mogadishu, such that the
    circumstances which caused this Appellant to be a refugee (that he  was
    the member of a minority clan)  have  ceased  to  apply  and  there  is
    nothing in the country guidance or otherwise to suggest any other basis
    on which he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Mogadishu.   In  these
    circumstances, the Appellant's appeal  against  the  cessation  of  his
    refugee status is dismissed.

Section 72 certificate

16. The next issue to address is whether  the  certificate  issued  by  the
    Respondent under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 stands, or whether the Appellant has rebutted the presumptions
    contained therein.  The Appellant accepts that he has been convicted of
    a particularly serious crime and therefore the  first  presumption  has
    not been rebutted.  The second question is  whether  the  Appellant  is
    also a danger to the community.  The Appellant's claim is  that  he  no
    longer poses a danger to the community and will not  reoffend;  on  the
    basis that he no longer  has  contact  with  those  he  was  previously
    involved in offending with; that he has been free from drug use now for
    some 18 months; now has a partner and  child  with  a  fresh  focus  on
    family life and his own responsibilities within  that;  has  a  renewed
    focus on his religion and essentially has grown up, realising the error
    of his past ways.

17. The Appellant's claim is based on his own written and oral evidence and
    save for a copy of the birth certificate of his son, is  not  supported
    by any other witness or documentary evidence.  In particular, there  is
    no OASys or other probation evidence, such  that  there  is  no  formal
    assessment of any risk of reoffending risk of harm in  the  future;  no
    evidence of completion of any drugs or victim awareness courses or  the
    like whilst in detention; no written or oral evidence from any  members
    of the Appellant's family in the United  Kingdom,  which  includes  his
    mother and numerous adult siblings, nor from his current partner.

18. I  note  that  the  Appellant,  when  faced  with  the  possibility  of
    deportation  after  one  of  the   earlier   offences,   made   similar
    representations  as  he  has  done  in  the  course  of   the   current
    proceedings, that he is no longer in contact with individuals with whom
    he has committed offences, that it is been sometime since the  previous
    offence and that  he  no  longer  poses  a  danger  to  the  community.
    Representations made on his behalf in a letter dated 27  December  2013
    contain the following statement:

         "[The Appellant] also points to the fact that after 2011 (aged  14)
         he has not committed any further criminal acts.  It is now December
         2013 and he is now 17 years.  [The Appellant]  is  not  in  contact
         with  those  individuals  with  whom  he  has  committed   criminal
         offences.  He fully intends not  to  resume  his  association  with
         those individuals and not to commit  any  further  offences.   [The
         Appellant] now fully understands the consequences  of  his  actions
         and feels he has been rehabilitated and does not feel that he is  a
         danger to the community."

19. At the time that statement was made to, the Appellant  had  already  in
    fact committed a further criminal offence and as we now know went on to
    commit further serious offences and  did  in  fact  pose  a  continuing
    danger to the community at that time.  Whilst I accept that  there  has
    been a further passage of time and that  the  Appellant  is  now  in  a
    relationship and has a young son, there is  little  further  difference
    between his circumstances and statements now as there were in 2013.

20. Following his conviction  on  23  June  2015  for  going  equipped  for
    burglary and an offence of battery, for which he  received  consecutive
    sentences of seven and three months respectively in a  Young  Offenders
    Institution; he was released from custody on 6 June  2016.   Since  his
    release, the Appellant's only conviction was  on  27  April  2017,  for
    three counts of possession of a controlled drug, which  he  states  was
    for personal use only.  The Appellant relies on his lack  of  offending
    since release from detention, save for the last offence in 2017.

21. Whilst I accept that the Appellant's circumstances have  changed  since
    his last conviction which received a custodial  sentence,  specifically
    by the relationship with his partner and birth of  his  son,  and  that
    some time has passed since  his  release  from  custody  and  his  last
    conviction,  I  do  not  find  that  the  Appellant  has  rebutted  the
    presumption in section 72 that he continues to pose  a  danger  to  the
    community.  The Appellant has a significant  criminal  history,  albeit
    mostly as a minor, at a time when he was in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    immediate family members and with their support  and  in  circumstances
    where he has previously failed to take the opportunities given  to  him
    to reform, as reflected  in  the  Sentencing  Remarks  for  the  latest
    custodial sentence  and  in  the  Respondent  not  previously  pursuing
    deportation against him.  In the context of this  Appellant's  history,
    there has been only a relatively short period without offending,  which
    again continued after his release from  the  last  custodial  sentence,
    (albeit a less serious offence without the imposition  of  a  custodial
    sentence); and  no  supporting  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  current
    position,  i.e.  as  to  family  support  or  the  strength  of  family
    relationships.

22. For these reasons and in accordance with the Upper Tribunal decision in
    Essa, I am also obliged to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds due  to
    the application of section 72(10) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights

23. In the alternative to his  asylum  grounds,  the  Appellant  separately
    relied upon his removal to Somalia being a breach of Article 3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights, on the basis that he would  be  at
    risk of destitution and inhumane  treatment  on  return  to  Mogadishu,
    because he has no contacts or family there, due to the  length  of  his
    absence from Somalia and the fact that he does not speak Somali.

24. As set out above,  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Said  and  MA  (Somalia)
    confirmed that the test to be applied in relation to Article 3 in cases
    such as the present, is that set out in N, such that it is only in very
    exceptional circumstances that there would be a violation of Article  3
    and there would be no such  violation  by  reason  of  a  person  being
    returned to a country which for economic  reasons  cannot  provide  him
    with basic living standards.

25. Whilst the factors in paragraphs 407(h) and a 408 of MOJ may have  some
    relevance to an assessment of Article 3, the Court of  Appeal  in  Said
    made it clear that if a Somali national  were  able  to  bring  him  or
    herself within the rubric of paragraph 408 of MOJ, that that of  itself
    would establish a breach of Article 3.

26. In the present  appeal,  the  Appellant's  claim,  even  taken  at  its
    highest, falls far short of the high threshold  set  out  in  N  for  a
    breach of Article 3.  Even if one were to  consider  those  factors  in
    paragraphs 407(h) and 408 of MOJ, I would not in any  event  find  that
    the Appellant would be destitute on return to Mogadishu nor  be  forced
    to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP  camp.   Although  the
    Appellant has been absent  from  Mogadishu  since  2004  and  there  is
    nothing to suggest  he  has  any  family  support  there  elsewhere  in
    Mogadishu  (the  whereabouts  of  his  father  being  unknown  and  his
    remaining family in  the  United  Kingdom),  no  any  established  clan
    support, he has not shown that there is any reason why he would not  be
    able to access the economic opportunities that have  been  produced  by
    the economic boom in Mogadishu, particularly in light of  the  evidence
    that returnees are taking jobs at the expense of  those  nationals  who
    have remained in Somalia.  The  Appellant  has  been  educated  in  the
    United Kingdom, he speaks English fluently and also  retains  at  least
    some Bravanese which would be of benefit in securing a livelihood.

27. The Appellant claims that he would not receive  any  financial  support
    from family members in the United  Kingdom  because  of  their  limited
    means, but there is no evidence from them directly on  this  point  and
    they are currently supporting him in the United Kingdom, even  if  only
    to a limited extent  through  the  provision  of  accommodation,  basic
    necessities and small amounts of cash.  There is no reason  as  to  why
    the Appellant's family members who  currently  support  him  would  not
    continue to do so on return to Somalia, at least in the  short-term  to
    assist him to re-establish  himself  there,  even  if  the  support  is
    relatively modest by standards in the United Kingdom.

28. For these reasons, the Appellant's appeal is dismissed under Article  3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Private & family life, Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights

29. Finally, the I deal with the Appellant's claim relying  on  family  and
    private life in the United Kingdom under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and the expression of the same in  paragraph
    398 and following of the Immigration Rules and in particular in section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

30.  In  relation  to  family  life,  the  Appellant  claims  to  be  in  a
    relationship with his partner, a Somali citizen with refugee status  in
    the United Kingdom.  However, the only  evidence  in  support  of  this
    relationship is the birth certificate  naming  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner as parents of a son born on 19 September  2018.   There  is  no
    other evidence at all about this relationship, whether it is continuing
    and what the effect, if any, would be on the Appellant's partner if the
    Appellant were to be deported.  The only evidence is in the Appellant's
    own statement that he does not currently live  with  his  partner,  but
    would do so and would intend to marry her once he is in a  position  to
    do so, by which he means his immigration matters are resolved and he is
    in employment.  There is no  written  statement  from  the  Appellant's
    partner and no reasonable explanation for the lack of such a  statement
    of her attendance at court in  support  of  the  Appellant.   There  is
    further no evidence or her refugee status or grant of indefinite  leave
    to remain to show the basis upon which she is in the United Kingdom.

31. In circumstances where there is almost a complete lack of  evidence  of
    any relationship, I do not find that the Appellant has established that
    he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship in United Kingdom with a
    qualifying  partner  such  that  he  cannot  meet  this  exception   to
    deportation in paragraph 399(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  nor  the
    second exception in section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.  In any event, there is nothing to  suggest  that  the
    effect of the Appellant's deportation on his claimed partner  would  be
    unduly harsh.

32. In relation to family life between the Appellant and his son, the birth
    certificate produced shows that the Appellant does have a son  born  in
    September 2018, but again there is no further evidence, save  for  that
    given orally by the Appellant that he  has  daily  involvement  in  his
    son's life, as to the nature of his relationship with his  son  or  the
    possible effect on him if the Appellant were to be deported.  Again, it
    is highly relevant that there is no written statement at all  from  the
    Appellant's partner/the mother and the child's nationality is  unknown,
    although it appears that he is not a British citizen on the Appellant's
    evidence that the mother was granted indefinite leave to  remain  after
    his birth.  In these circumstances, it has not  been  established  that
    the Appellant's son is a qualifying child, nor that in  any  event  the
    effect of the Appellant's deportation on him would be unduly harsh such
    that he cannot meet the exception to deportation  paragraph  399(a)  of
    the Immigration Rules, nor the second exception in section  117C(5)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

33. Although the Respondent accepts that the Appellant has established some
    form of private life in the United Kingdom due to the passage  of  time
    that he has been living here, it has not been suggested that  he  meets
    any of the exceptions to deportation on the basis of private life under
    paragraph 399A of the Immigration  Rules  or  exception  1  in  section
    117C(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

34. As the Appellant  does  not  meet  any  of  the  stated  exceptions  to
    deportation, the only remaining consideration  is  as  to  whether  the
    public  interest  in  deportation  is  outweighed  by  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the express exceptions.  The circumstances
    relied upon by Counsel for the Appellant  are  the  Appellant's  family
    life with his partner and son, taking into account the  best  interests
    of the latter in accordance with section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  It was submitted that if the Appellant  were
    returned to Somalia, he could not continue to undertake his role  as  a
    father as it would be difficult for family to visit him and his  likely
    lack of finances on return would  prevent  him  from  even  maintaining
    communication with his family.

35. Whilst I take into account the accepted position that it  is  generally
    in the best interests of a child to be brought up by  both  parents  in
    the same country, the almost complete lack of evidence in  relation  to
    the Appellant's partner and child  mean  that  no  further  substantive
    assessment of the best interests of  the  child  can  realistically  be
    undertaken on the evidence available in this case.   There  is  further
    nothing to suggest that the Appellant's son could not  continue  to  be
    adequately cared for by his mother, as is the current situation, in the
    United Kingdom.  I do not find that even taken at its very highest, the
    Appellant's claims to family life with  his  partner  and  child  could
    amount to a very compelling circumstances sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    considerable public interest in his  deportation,  such  that  he  also
    cannot meet paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules, nor section 117C(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

36. For all of these  reasons,  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the attached error of law  decision,  the  making
of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and  as  such  it  was  necessary  to  set  aside  the
decision.

The decision is remade as follows:

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     26th July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


ANNEX

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00024/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2018                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Umoh, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow
Office)


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission against a decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bird promulgated on 25 May 2018 in which the appellant's
    appeal was allowed on asylum grounds and also on Article 3 and Article
    8 grounds.  The appellant is a national of Somalia who had applied on
    human rights grounds to revoke a Deportation Order made against him on
    18 January 2016, which was refused by the respondent in a decision
    dated 27 January 2017.  For ease we refer continue to refer to the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, with Mr AS as the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

The respondent appeals on three primary grounds.  The first is in relation
to the finding that the First-tier Tribunal made that the Section 72
certificate was rebutted.  The second is on the basis that there were no
reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal for departing from the country
guidance case of MOJ & others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG 2014 UKUT
00442 (IAC) in relation to the cessation of refugee status, and the third
is in relation to Article 8 grounds that only a cursory consideration was
given with no obvious weight attached to, or consideration given to, the
public interest when allowing the appeal on those grounds as well.

We deal in most detail with the first ground of appeal on the basis that a
finding on that potentially infects the other findings that follow in the
decision.

In relation to the certificate pursuant to section 72 certificate of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"), subsection 2
states:

"(2) A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a final judgment
of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to the community
of the United Kingdom if he is -

(a)  convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

(b)  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years."

Section 72(6) of the 2002 Act shows that a presumption is that a person
convicted of a particularly serious crime constitutes a danger to the
community that is rebuttable by that person and in particular, section
72(9) and (10) apply to the Tribunal when looking at the presumption.  That
is a statutory presumption which applies in cases such as the present one,
rebuttable only by the appellant.

In the First-tier Tribunal's decision references are made in paragraphs 44
and 47 in particular, that the presumption has been rebutted because in
paragraph 44, "the respondent has failed to provide evidence to show that
the appellant continues to be a risk to the general community", and in 47:

"The courts have consistently held that the burden of raising the
presumption under section 72 (Article 33(2)) is on the respondent.  As
there is no evidence provided by the respondent to show that the appellant
presents a continuing danger to the community now, I find that the
presumption under section 72 is rebutted."

That clearly puts the burden on the wrong party in this appeal.  It is a
statutory presumption that can only be rebutted by the appellant.  It is
not for the respondent to show evidence of a continuing risk or danger to
the community.  That error of law is material and if the burden of
rebutting the presumption had been made the other way around the conclusion
may well have been different.

The Upper Tribunal was also concerned in this case that the full offending
history of the appellant has not been set out or considered either in the
background section or in the section in relation to the section 72
certificate comprehensively and it is of concern that it therefore has not
been fully taken into account when looking at whether the presumption is
rebutted.

There is also, because the burden of rebutting the presumption was the
wrong way around, no reasons given as to why the appellant has rebutted it,
given the short passage of time since his last offending in February 2017.
That error of law, which is material, goes on to infect the findings that
were made in relation to cessation under the Refugee Convention (from which
the Appellant is excluded if the presumption is not rebutted and the
certificate remains) and also carries through to some extent in the Article
8 assessment, which is allowed essentially for the same reasons already
given, having found a breach of Article 3 and allowing the appeal under the
Refugee Convention.

We would also add in relation to Article 8 that it is a material error of
law in paragraph 75 for the First-tier Tribunal to have made no express
findings for the required balancing exercise being undertaken to determine
the proportionality of removal.  In the final sentence the First-tier
Tribunal simply says: "In his particular circumstances any removal under
Article 8 of the ECHR would cause a breach of his right to continue to
exercise his private life in the United Kingdom and any removal is
therefore disproportionate in the circumstances."  That does not indicate
any consideration at all of the public interest to be balanced against the
appellant's right to respect for private life nor does it take into account
the statutory factors that a tribunal is required to when considering the
public interest part of the proportionality exercise in section 117B and
117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Notice of Decision

There are clear errors of law in this decision such that it must be set
aside and we do set it aside.  In light of the fact that this appeal has
already been through the First-tier Tribunal on two occasions, we reserve
the decision to the Upper Tribunal for a further hearing to remake it.

Signed        [pic]        Date         17th December 2018

 Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

