
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00072/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th September 2019               |On 3rd January 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MSC
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pipe, instructed by Rashid & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),
      and as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is
      made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, MSC is
      granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
      applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is MSC.
       However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I
      adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to MSC as
      the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


   3. The appellant is a national of Somalia.  He arrived in the UK in 2003
      and following a successful appeal he was granted refugee status in
      July 2004.  On 6 April 2017, the appellant was convicted at Birmingham
      Crown Court of causing serious injury by dangerous driving for which
      he was sentenced, on 18 May 2017, to 18 months imprisonment.  On 30
      May 2017, the appellant was notified that s32(5) of the UK Borders Act
      2007 ("the 2007 Act") places a duty on the SSHD to make a deportation
      order against him unless he can demonstrate that one or more of the
      specified exceptions set out in s33 of the 2007 Act applies to him.
      The appellant made representations on 10 June 2017 setting out why he
      should not be deported.  Following consideration of the
      representations the appellant was served with a decision dated 9 April
      2018 to refuse a protection and human rights claim. That decision gave
      rise to an appeal that was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Moan
      ("the judge") on 10 September 2018. The appeal was allowed on all
      grounds for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 26th
      September 2018.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


   4. A brief summary of the background and the matters relied upon by the
      appellant is set out at paragraphs [11] to [16] of the decision of the
      FtT judge.  The judge noted the appellant is from Jowhar and his
      original asylum claim was based on his ethnicity as a member of the
      minority Ashraf clan.  She noted the respondent claims the appellant
      can relocate to Mogadishu upon return to Somalia.


   5. The Judge found, at [28], the appellant could not safely return to his
      home area in Jowhar, and noted at [29], the issue is whether it is
      reasonable for the appellant to relocate to Mogadishu.  At [32] and
      [33], the judge said:


          "32.     There is little from the case of MOJ or the CPIN to
         suggest that the appellant will be persecuted as a result of his
         minority clan status in Mogadishu. I note that even the UNHCR
         letter refers to marginalisation, lack of protection and
         instability rather than actual persecution. In my judgement, the
         issue the appellant would face is the conditions upon his return,
         including his treatment potentially as an IDP.

         33.  The CPIN confirms that minority groups are disadvantaged. It
         is agreed that the appellant is part of a minority clan. The CPIN
         states that some clans have well established communities in
         Mogadishu. The CPIN also confirms at para 2.3.4 that members of
         minority groups can end up in internally displaced person groups
         where they face particularly difficult treatment. This was
         emphasised in paragraph 8 of the CPIN.  The case of MOJ emphasised
         that those returning to Somalia without support will end up in IDP
         camps and will face conditions that fall below humanitarian
         standards. The UNHCR had similar concerns. I also note the CPIN at
         paragraph 8 referred to threats from criminals and the police in
         IDP camps and that they ran with minimal support."

   6. At paragraph [35], the judge referred to the evidence that the
      appellant lives with his aunt and her son. She found that this is not
      a family with significant means to support the appellant financially
      upon his return to Somalia. She accepted the appellants claim that he
      has had no contact with his father and sister in Somalia since 2003.
      The judge found it is highly unlikely that the appellant will have
      access to clan support in Mogadishu. At paragraphs [36] to [38] the
      judge stated:


          "36.     There is little to suggest that it is safe for the
         appellant to return to Jowhar. The respondent has now (sic) shown
         that there has been a change in circumstances in that area. The
         respondent has shown that there has been a change in circumstances
         in Mogadishu that is significant and not temporary.

          37. Whilst I find that the appellant will not be persecuted in
         Mogadishu, I consider that he would be at risk of Article 3
         treatment upon his return due to the lack of support noting his
         minority clan status and his long absence from Somalia. He is
         likely to end up in an IDP camp and MOJ confirms that the
         conditions therein fall below those that are humanitarian.

          38. Noting that I consider that the appellant is at real risk of
         article 3 treatment in Mogadishu, I do not consider it a reasonable
         for him to relocate to Mogadishu. On that basis, he retains his
         refugee status as he cannot internally relocate."

   7. For the reasons set out in paragraphs [40] to [48], the judge felt
      unable to conclude that the appellant poses a danger to the community
      and was unable to conclude that the appellant is excluded from a grant
      of humanitarian protection in any event.


   8. The judge went on to consider the appellant's Article 8 claim at
      paragraphs [49] to [52] of the decision. The judge concluded at
      paragraph [53] as follows:


         "For the reasons given for the appellant's ongoing need for
         protection, I consider that the appellant would have very
         significant obstacles in integrating. He lacked support from his
         family, and he had no established clan support. He would have
         difficulty supporting himself and was likely to end up in an IDP
         camp. I do not accept that subsisting in an IDP camp is integration
         into the community. For those reasons, I am satisfied that he would
         have very significant obstacles in integrating in Somalia."

   9. Having concluded the appellant is able to satisfy the requirements set
      out in paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules, the judge concluded
      at [56], that the deportation of the appellant is disproportionate,
      and in breach of his Article 8 rights.


The appeal before me


  10. The respondent claims the appellant was granted refugee status on the
      basis of his membership of a minority clan, and the country guidance
      set out in MOJ now establishes that there are no clan militias in
      Mogadishu, no clan violence, and no clan-based discriminatory
      treatment even for minority clan members.  The respondent claims the
      judge failed to sufficiently engage with the country guidance and if
      the availability of internal relocation is sufficient to prevent a
      person acquiring refugee status, it must also be sufficient to justify
      the cessation of such status provided the change of circumstances is
      of such a significant and non-temporary nature that the refugee's fear
      of persecution can no longer be regarded as well founded. Furthermore,
      the respondent claims that a lack support and destitution leading to
      the appellant having to reside in an IDP camp does not of itself
      amount to a protection claim or entitlement to refugee status. The
      Judge found the appellant is likely to find himself living in
      makeshift accommodation in an IDP camp but in considering the
      appellant's return to Mogadishu the judge failed to have regard to
      other relevant factors including his prospects of securing a
      livelihood, the skills and qualifications he has obtained in the UK
      and the fact that he is a young healthy male who is able to speak
      Somali. The respondent claims these are all factors relevant to the
      appellant's ability to integrate economically upon return to
      Mogadishu. The respondent claims that while the appellant's family may
      not be able to support him entirely (although that has not been
      determined by the judge), some remittances coupled with an ability to
      work, could conceivably avoid the appellant's forced residence in an
      IDP camp.  It was for the appellant to explain why he would not be
      able to access the economic opportunities that have been produced by
      the economic boom in Mogadishu, and the judge simply fails to make
      sufficient findings in respect of material matters.


  11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell
      on 22nd October 2018. He considered it arguable that the judge fails
      to engage with the evidence provided of current country conditions and
      has arguably not followed the country guidance set out in MOJ.


  12. Before me, Mr Mills refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
      MS (Somalia) [2019] EWCA Civ 1345.  Hamblen LJ, with whom Newey LJ and
      Underhill LJ agreed, held the SSHD could rely upon the availability of
      internal relocation as the basis for the cessation of refugee status
      under the Refugee Convention.  Mr Mills submits the judge accepted, at
      [36], there has been a change in circumstances in Mogadishu that is
      significant and not temporary. The judge found at [37] the appellant
      will not be persecuted in Mogadishu but would be at risk of treatment
      contrary to Article 3 due to the lack of support and the likelihood of
      the appellant ending up in an IDP camp.  Mr Mills submits the judge
      erroneously followed the guidance set out at headnote (xii) of MOJ in
      reaching her conclusion that the appellant would be at risk of
      treatment contrary to Article 3 because he is likely to end up in an
      IDP camp and MOJ confirms that the conditions therein fall below those
      that are humanitarian. The guidance was disapproved by the Court of
      Appeal in Said -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 422 in so far as it purports
      to establish the circumstances in which removal to Somalia would
      infringe Article 3.  In MS (Somalia), Hamblen LJ stated at paragraph
      [76]:


              "By relying upon and applying paragraph 408 of the MOJ
         decision in determining whether there would be a breach of Article
         3 ECHR the FTT accordingly applied the wrong legal test, as Said v
         SSHD makes clear."




  13. Mr Mills submits the country guidance in MOJ makes it clear that it
      will be for the person facing return to explain why he would not be
      able to access the economic opportunities that are being produced by
      the economic boom in Mogadishu and it will only be those with no clan
      or family support, will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad
      and who have no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on
      return, who will face the prospect of living in circumstances falling
      below that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms. There
      was no evidence before the FtT that the appellant has no real prospect
      of securing access to a livelihood and the judge had found, at [52],
      that English is a major language in Somalia and the appellant will
      have some cultural heritage with Somalia.


  14. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Pipe accepts that the issue in the
      appeal, as set out at paragraph [29], was whether the SSHD could rely
      upon the availability of internal relocation as the basis for the
      cessation of refugee status under the Refugee Convention.  He submits
      the appellant simply had to establish that it would be unduly harsh
      for him to relocate to Mogadishu and he was not required to establish
      that his return to Mogadishu would be in breach of his Article 3
      rights.  He submits the judge had regard to the country guidance set
      out in MOJ at paragraphs [30] to [33] of the decision and considered
      the personal circumstances of the appellant at paragraphs [34] to [37]
      of her decision.  It was open to the Judge to find that the
      appellant's family is not a family with significant means to support
      the appellant financially upon his return to Somalia and that he would
      have a lack of support in Mogadishu such that he is likely to end up
      in an IDP camp.  Mr Pipe submits that when the decision is read as a
      whole it must be implicit that in considering the totality of the
      evidence, the judge had in mind the economic opportunities that have
      been produced by the economic boom and the prospect of securing access
      to a livelihood on return, notwithstanding the judge's failure to
      expressly refer to those matters in the decision.  He submits that if
      there is an error in the Judge's approach, that error is immaterial
      even on the limited findings made.  The Judge found the high threshold
      required to establish an Article 3 claim was met by the appellant and
      it must follow that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to
      internally relocate to Mogadishu.


Discussion


  15. The appellant comes from Jowhar and his original claim for asylum was
      based on his ethnicity as a member of the Ashraf clan.   The Judge
      found the respondent has not shown that there has been a change in
      circumstances in Jowhar and the appellant cannot return to Jowhar.
      That finding is not challenged by the respondent.  It is common ground
      that the issue for the judge was whether the SSHD could rely upon the
      availability of internal relocation as the basis for the cessation of
      refugee status under the Refugee Convention.  Such an assessment must
      be based on an individual and not merely a general evaluation of the
      changed conditions and risks arising in the country of return.


  16. In SSHD -v- MA (Somali) [2018] EWCA Civ 994 Lady Justice Arden made it
      clear that there should be a symmetry between the grant and cessation
      of refugee status. The Court of Appeal held that a state seeking to
      terminate a person's status as a refugee did not have to investigate
      whether there would be a violation of Article 3 if the refugee was
      returned to their country of origin. All that is required, on a proper
      construction of Abdulla -v- Germany (C-175/08) is for the
      circumstances leading to the grant of refugee status, to have ceased
      to exist such that it could be described as 'significant and non-
      temporary' within the terms of article 11(2) of the Qualification
      Directive. At [47] she said, "There is no necessary reason why refugee
      status should be continued beyond the time when the refugee is subject
      to the persecution which would entitle him to refugee status or any
      other persecution which would result in him being a refugee, or why he
      should be entitled to further protection.".


  17. As here, the appellant in MS (Somalia) had been granted refugee status
      and following a conviction for which he was sentenced to 20 months
      imprisonment, was notified of the SSHD's intention to cease his
      refugee status. Following consideration of representations, MS was
      made the subject of a deportation order and a decision to refuse his
      protection and human rights claims. The FtT judge allowed MS's appeal
      on the basis that the criteria for cessation of refugee status had not
      been made out and MS should continue to have protection under the
      refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR.  Hamblen LJ, endorsed the
      'mirror image' approach referred to by Arden LJ in SSHD -v- MA
      (Somalia).  Hamblen LJ said, at paragraph [49]:


         "In summary, in a case in which refugee status has been granted
         because the person cannot reasonably be expected to relocate, a
         cessation decision may be made if circumstances change, so as to
         mean that that person could reasonably be expected to relocate,
         provided that the change in circumstances is, in the language of
         the Qualification Directive, "significant and non-temporary".
         Helpful guidance in relation to the assessment of the
         reasonableness of internal relocation is given in the recent
         decision of this Court in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ
         873.

  18. Having carefully read the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moan,
      in my judgement, the judge erred in her consideration of the issue
      before her, by applying the wrong test to the cessation of refugee
      protection issue, by conflating it with Article 3 and the prospect of
      the appellant returning to live in an IDP camp, in conditions that
      fall below those that are humanitarian.  As Lady Justice Arden
      explained at [56] of MA (Somalia), "humanitarian standards are not the
      test for a cessation decision.". At [61], she made it clear that a
      cessation decision does not involve the question whether Article 3
      would be violated.


  19. The Court of Appeal in Said -v- SSHD held that there is no violation
      of Article 3 by reason only of a person being returned to a country
      which for economic reasons, cannot provide him with basic living
      standards. The Upper Tribunal had allowed a Somali national's appeal
      against deportation following a sentence of five years for rape under
      Article 3 (he being excluded from protection under the Refugee
      Convention and on humanitarian protection grounds), finding that for
      the purposes of MOJ he was vulnerable, had PTSD, and would be at risk
      of destitution and thus likely to end up in an IDP camp. The Court of
      Appeal held that to succeed in resisting removal on Article 3 grounds
      on the basis of suggested poverty/deprivation, which was not the
      responsibility of the receiving country, whether or not the feared
      deprivation was contributed to by a medical condition, the person
      liable to deportation was required to show circumstances which brought
      him within the approach in D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423 and N 47 EHRR
      885.


  20. The judge should have properly addressed whether internal relocation
      to Mogadishu would be unduly harsh. An individual excluded from the
      protection of the refugee Convention cannot defeat the cessation
      decision or bring himself within Article 3 ECHR to defeat deportation
      on grounds of the conditions upon return, including his treatment
      potentially as an IDP.  Although I accept that it is potentially open
      to a judge to make findings on humanitarian protection grounds, the
      judge's consideration was not in my judgment, properly part of her
      consideration as to the cessation of refugee status.


  21. The judge relied upon (xii) of the headnote in MOJ on the basis that
      "relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no
      former links to the city, no access to funds and no other form of
      clan, family or social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in the
      absence of means to establish a home and some form of ongoing
      financial support there will be a real risk of having no alternative
      but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there
      is a real possibility of having to live in conditions that will fall
      below acceptable humanitarian standards.".  I accept, as Mr Mills
      submits, the judge failed to have regard to relevant factors such as
      whether the appellant has a prospect of securing access to a
      livelihood on return, in reaching her decision.  If the judge did
      consider such matters, the judge did so, without supporting reasoning.
       Although the judge found the appellant's family is not a family with
      significant means to support the appellant financially upon his
      return, the judge appears to have discounted the possibility of the
      Assisted Voluntary Return financial assistance that would be available
      to him and did not take into account the finding at [351] of MOJ that
      returnees from the West may have an advantage since they are likely to
      be better educated and considered more resourceful.  It was also for
      the appellant to explain why he would not be able to access the
      improving economic situation in Mogadishu. The decision does not
      explain that this was done.


  22. The decision of the judge to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds is
      inextricably linked to the conclusions reached by the Judge as to the
      need for ongoing protection.


  23. In my judgement the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moan is
      infected by a material error of law and should be set aside.  As to
      disposal, in my judgement the remaking of the decision will involve
      extensive fact-finding, particularly in respect of the issue that is
      at the heart of the appeal as to whether the appellant can internally
      relocate to Mogadishu.


Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moan promulgated on 26th
September 2018 is set aside and remitted for rehearing before the First-
tier Tribunal afresh with no findings preserved.  The parties will be
notified of a hearing date in due course.


Signed                                  Date     20th December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



