
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00028/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2019                   |On 25 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                                    Y H T
                            (ANOYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nathan of counsel, instructed by J. McCarthy
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL


1.   The Respondent applied for asylum on 1 October 2007,  stating  that  he
    was a national of Sudan and a member  of  the  Zaghawa  tribe  and  the
    Justice and Equality Movement. His  application  was  refused  but  his
    subsequent appeal was allowed and he was granted refugee status  on  26
    March 2010.


2.   It is the Appellant's case that the Respondent is a  national  of  Chad
    and that this is confirmed by the fact that he applied for visit  visas
    for the United States of America in the name of Hassan Aboulaya Yaya in
    May, June and September 2005 and 23 August 2007.


3.   The Respondent arrived back in the United Kingdom on 17 June  2013  and
    his travel document disclosed that he  had  visited  Chad  as  well  as
    France. The Appellant cancelled the Respondent's refugee status  on  15
    January 2019. The Respondent and his wife were also refused  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  5  March  2019  but  he  was
    granted limited leave to remain for 30 months on human rights grounds.


4.   The Respondent appealed against the  decision  to  revoke  his  refugee
    status and First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall allowed his  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 12 July 2019.  The Appellant  appealed  against
    this decision and on 7  August  2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford
    refused permission to  appeal.  However,  on  5  September  2019  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hanson granted the Appellant permission to  appeal.  The
    Respondent filed a Rule 24 Response on 8 October 2019.


ERROR OF LAW HEARING


5.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for the  Respondent
    made oral submissions and I have taken these into account when reaching
    my findings below.


ERROR OF LAW DECISION


6.   The Immigration Rules relating to revocation of refugee status state:


         "338A a person's grant of refugee status under paragraph 334  shall
         be revoked or not  renewed  if  any  of  paragraphs  39A  to  339AB
         apply..."


         ...


         339AB This paragraph  applies  where  the  Secretary  of  State  is
         satisfied that the person's misrepresentation or omission of facts,
         including the use of false documents, were decisive for  the  grant
         of refugee status".


7.   The Respondent accepted that he did use a false identity  in  order  to
    attempt to obtain a visa to the United States in 2005 and  2007,  as  a
    national of Chad, and he did not deny  that  his  fingerprints  matched
    those disclosed by the US Department of Homeland Security in 2008.


8.   This led to him being interviewed under caution at Huddersfield  Police
    Station on 28 August 2008 by an Immigration Officer, after he had  been
    arrested for attempting to obtain leave by  deception.  He  immediately
    confirmed that he had used another name when applying for visas to  the
    United States.


9.   In the  first  ground  of  appeal,  the  Appellant  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 16 of his decision First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Randall  gave
    inadequate reasons for placing weight upon the evidence  given  by  Mr.
    Philip Cox at the earlier hearing before Immigration Judge  Wynne.  She
    relied on the fact that the Judge  had  noted  that  Immigration  Judge
    Wynne had "allowed the [Respondent's] appeal based on his  relationship
    with his brother, a JEM commander, relying entirely  on  the  oral  and
    written evidence of a journalist, Mr. Cox".


10.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Randall should not have given weight to Mr. Cox's evidence as  at
    the hearing before Immigration Judge Wynne the Secretary of  State  did
    not dispute that the Respondent was a national of Sudan and Mr. Cox was
    not cross-examined about the Respondent's nationality.


11.  In paragraph 5.2 of his decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Randall
    summarised the letter of support provided by Mr. Cox, dated 8  February
    2008. This was that whilst reporting in Chad and  Dafur  in  March  and
    April 2007, he met a JEM commander and that he  then  subsequently  met
    this  commander's  brother,  the  Respondent,  in  London.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Randall also had had the benefit of reading  Immigration
    Judge  Wynne's  determination.  In  paragraphs  62  to   74   of   this
    determination he recorded the evidence given by Mr. Cox  in  chief  and
    when cross-examined and re-examined. It was clear that Mr. Cox had  met
    the Respondent by chance at a Darfur meeting in London in January  2008
    and had realised during their subsequent conversation that he  was  the
    brother of a JEM  Commander,  who  he  had  previously  met  with  when
    reporting in Dafur and Chad. The clear implication to be drawn from Mr.
    Cox's evidence was that he believed that the Respondent was the brother
    of a Sudanese JEM commander and that he had met  the  Respondent  at  a
    meeting at Darfur in London.


12.  It is my view that this evidence is sustainable,  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant subsequently doubted the  Respondent's  nationality,  as  the
    evidence related to Mr. Cox's belief that the Respondent was related as
    claimed. The fact that he met the Respondent at a meeting on Darfur and
    that this was a chance meeting also added weight to both the fact  that
    the Respondent was Sudanese and that he had not manipulated  a  meeting
    with Mr. Cox.


13.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall also noted that  Mr.  Cox's  evidence
    was not challenged by Ms Afazli, the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    appearing before him. The Judge did not prepare a  separate  record  of
    proceedings but appeared to have incorporated  it  into  his  decision.
    This decision was very detailed and First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Randall
    summarised the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State  by
    Ms Afzali at paragraph 11 of his decision and there was  no  suggestion
    that she had challenged the evidence given by Mr. Cox.


14.  It is correct to state in the  Appellant's  decision  letter,  she  did
    assert that the Respondent  was  a  national  of  Chad  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Randall noted this in paragraph 11.2  of  his  decision.
    However, for the reasons given above, it was not unlawful  for  him  to
    give some weight to the evidence previously given  by  Mr.  Cox  before
    Immigration Judge Wynne, as no further evidence had  been  provided  in
    relation to the  evidence  given  by  Mr.  Cox  which  was  capable  of
    undermining that evidence and which did not relate to the  Respondent's
    nationality but to his relationship to his brother. In addition, it  is
    clear from paragraphs 7 to 7.8 of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Randall's
    decision that Ms Afzali did not cross-examine the Respondent about  his
    meeting with Mr. Cox or challenge the basis on which Mr. Cox  concluded
    that the Respondent was related to his brother, as claimed.


15.  In addition, at paragraph 16 of his decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Randall correctly directed himself about  the  weight  which  could  be
    given to Immigration Judge Wynne's findings, stating  "although,  under
    Devaseelan principles the findings of Immigration Judge  Wynne  are  my
    starting point, there have clearly been significant developments in the
    11 years since then. Furthermore, it is common ground that not all  the
    material before me, even material in existence in 2008, was before  the
    Immigration Judge Wynne".


16.  Furthermore, as by the time of the hearing before him the  Respondent's
    identity and nationality were in issue, First-tier Tribunal Judge  gave
    careful consideration to the totality of the evidence submitted by  the
    Respondent in relation to this issue. He referred to letters of support
    from  Ismail  Karar  Babo,  Adam  Musa  and  the   Sudanese   Community
    Association West Yorkshire. He also referred to the oral evidence given
    by Adam Musa, Amal Akasha and Mr. Khamis. The  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer sought to discredit this evidence but in  paragraph  20  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Randall gave detailed and cogent reasons for giving
    weight to the evidence and for concluding that  the  Respondent  was  a
    Sudanese national.


17.  In the second  ground  of  appeal  it  was  submitted  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Randall's finding in paragraph 20 of  his  decision  was
    wholly unreasoned in so far as he took into account the fact  that  the
    Respondent had stated that "the  US  authorities  didn't  consider  him
    Chadian, which is why he claims they refused his visa application".


18.  However, in my view, these  two  sentences  have  to  be  read  in  the
    context of the totality of the content of  paragraph  20,  which  is  a
    review by First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall of the evidence  which  may
    confirm that  the  Appellant  is  Sudanese.   The  Respondent  has  not
    challenged the other findings of fact made by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Randall in that paragraph.


19.  I also note that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Randall  also  found  in
    paragraph 21 of his decision: "Although the Appellant is not a truthful
    witness, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities,  having  heard
    the evidence of the three witnesses, and bearing in mind  the  evidence
    of Mr Cox which was accepted in its entirety  by  IJ  Wynne  and  never
    challenged subsequently, and having considered the documentary evidence
    from Sudan, and the country material, that the Appellant is a  Sudanese
    national and the brother of a JEM commander".  This makes it clear that
    ultimately the Judge did not give weight to  what  the  Appellant  said
    about the US authorities' reason for refusing him  visas  and  did  not
    need to do so in the light of the significant amount of other  evidence
    about the Appellant's nationality.


20.  In her third ground of appeal the Appellant submitted  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Randall's findings were predicated on a mistake of fact.
    Counsel for the Respondent had submitted, as noted in paragraph 12.2 of
    the Judge's decision that the Appellant's fraud was "fully investigated
    between the interview in 2008 and the grant of refugee status in 2010".
    The Judge also noted in paragraph 12.4 that counsel had submitted  that
    "the facts that formed the basis of the allegation that  the  Appellant
    was in fact from Chad emerged  in  his  interview  in  2008,  from  the
    material discovered earlier by the [Secretary of State] and the US, and
    was clearly in the mind of the [Secretary of State] by 2010".


21.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall had then found  at  paragraph  22  of
    his  decision  that  "In  any  event,  and  most  importantly  for  the
    determination of  this  appeal,  the  material  about  the  Appellant's
    application in Chad was clearly known  to  the  Respondent  before  the
    Appellant was recognised as a refugee in 2010 and must have  been  part
    of the evidence considered prior to the decision".


22.  The Appellant now seeks to rely on the fact  that  the  Respondent  and
    those then representing him, Lawrence Lupin  Solicitors,  were  sent  a
    request for a further interview to ascertain A's identity on  14  April
    2010, one week after he was granted  asylum.   However,  this  was  not
    evidence which was before the Judge and, therefore, it cannot  be  said
    that it was an error of law for him not to take it into account.


23.  In any  event,  it  now  appears  from  the  disclosure  given  by  the
    Appellant that this interview was subsequently cancelled  on  21  April
    2014 and no further action has  been  taken  since  then  to  make  any
    further enquiries about the Respondent's identity.  As  this  interview
    was cancelled, the fact  that  the  Respondent  did  not  disclose  the
    initial invitation to be interview is also not capable to  casting  any
    doubt on his credibility.


24.  For the reasons given above I find that there were no  material  errors
    of law in First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall's decision.





DECISION


(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall's decision is maintained.




Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 22 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

