
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00061/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 01 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L. Moore, Deputy Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Moffatt, Counsel, instructed by the Harrow Law
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This case concerns whether the judge below was justified  in  departing
    from the relevant country guidance. This is an appeal of the  Secretary
    of  State  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Bird
    promulgated on 20 February 2019 allowing the claimant's appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to revoke  the  deportation
    order made against him and to revoke his protection status.


Factual background

 2. The claimant is SAS, a citizen of Somalia  born  1  October  1971.   He
    arrived in this country in 1999 and was granted asylum on 13 June 2000.
    The basis of his grant of asylum arose from his family's membership  of
    the Reerhamar-Bandhabow minority clan in Somalia.  When the  civil  war
    started in 1991, the ruling party started to  persecute  minority  clan
    members.  The claimant's family home was  raided  by  the  authorities,
    plundered, and the women raped.  The family fled internally and  became
    destitute.  The appellant was later  attacked  and  left  for  dead  by
    government forces.  He fled to Ethiopia and later the  United  Kingdom.
    He was recognised as a refugee by the Secretary of State.

 3. On 24 March 2017 in the Crown Court at Wood  Green,  the  claimant  was
    convicted of three counts of dishonestly making a false  representation
    and was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.  On 21 August  2017,  the
    Secretary of State served a notice of a decision to make a  deportation
    order on the claimant. He was notified  that  he  was  subject  to  the
    statutory presumption contained  in  section  72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It is now  common  ground  that  that
    certification  was  in  error;  pursuant  to  section   72(2)(b),   the
    presumption is engaged only in relation to periods of  imprisonment  of
    at least two years.  As outlined by the First-tier  Tribunal  at  [13],
    the certificate was withdrawn by the respondent: see  the  respondent's
    letter dated 17 October 2018.

 4. On 22 November 2017, the Secretary of State informed the claimant  that
    he intended to revoke his refugee status.  Correspondence  between  the
    claimant's solicitors and the respondent, and the United  Nations  High
    Commissioner for Refugees ("the UNHCR") followed. This culminated in  a
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 27 February 2018 revoking  the
    appellant's refugee status. On 10 April 2018, the claimant  was  served
    with a signed deportation order and a decision to refuse his protection
    and human rights claim, made in response to the  Secretary  of  State's
    earlier indications that he was minded to revoke his refugee status.

 5. The basis upon which the Secretary  of  State  revoked  the  claimant's
    refugee status was that the circumstances in which he was recognised as
    a refugee had ceased to exist, pursuant to paragraph  339A(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which give effect to Article 1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  The Secretary of State based his decision  on  MOJ  &  Ors
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), to  which  we
    return in more detail below.

 6. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  10  April
    2018 decision.  Judge  Bird  allowed  his  appeal  on  the  basis  that
    conditions in Mogadishu and Somalia generally had  changed  since  MOJ,
    such that a departure from  the  country  guidance  was  merited.   The
    claimant  succeeded  on  Article  3  grounds  in  any  event   in   the
    alternative.





Permission to appeal

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Hansen on  the
    basis that it was arguable that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    merit a departure from MOJ.  As such, the Judge's findings at [63] that
    the respondent had not demonstrated that there had been a  durable  and
    permanent change were arguably infected by the erroneous departure from
    the country guidance.

Documents

 8. In addition to the materials that were before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    we have been provided with written  submissions  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, and a response under rule 24 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 from the claimant.

Submissions

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  the  presenting  officer  submits
    that the judge materially erred in her finding that there had not  been
    a significant and non-temporary change in  the  conditions  in  Somalia
    which merited his earlier recognition as a refugee. This submission  is
    based primarily  on  the  following  clear  findings  outlined  in  the
    headnote to MOJ, which held that conditions in Mogadishu had stabilised
    considerably.  See the following relevant extracts from the headnote:

         "(ii)    Generally, a person who is "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.
         not associated with the security forces; any aspect  of  government
         or  official   administration   or   any   NGO   or   international
         organisation) on returning to Mogadishu after a period  of  absence
         will face no real risk of persecution...


         (iii)    There has been durable change in the  sense  that  the  Al
         Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there is no  real
         prospect of a re-established presence within the city. That was not
         the case at the time of the country guidance given by the  Tribunal
         in AMM [and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)
         Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC)] ...


         (viii)   The significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
         changed. Clans now provide, potentially, social support  mechanisms
         and assist  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
         protection function than previously. There are no clan militias  in
         Mogadishu, no clan  violence,  and  no  clan  based  discriminatory
         treatment, even for minority clan members."


10. Paragraph 342 of MOJ  states  that  clan  membership  is  no  longer  a
    potential risk factor, but rather  a  factor  relevant  to  whether  an
    individual would be  able  to  access  support  structures  upon  their
    return.

11. It is the Secretary of State's position that if MOJ were applied to the
    claimant, his appeal would be bound to fail.  The  Secretary  of  State
    relies on the test for departing from country guidance  articulated  in
    SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ
    940 at [47] in these terms:

         "...  tribunal  judges  are  required  to  take  Country   Guidance
         determinations into account, and to follow them unless very  strong
         grounds supported by cogent evidence, are adduced justifying  their
         not doing so."

    In the Secretary of State's submission, the evidence relied upon by the
    judge to justify her departure from MOJ did not provide  the  requisite
    very strong grounds or cogent evidence. Indeed, it is the Secretary  of
    State's case that not only did the  reasons  given  by  the  judge  not
    amount to a sufficiently strong basis to justify  departing  from  MOJ,
    but the judge misunderstood and misquoted the evidence  she  took  into
    account in attempting to do so.

12. The presenting  officer  submits  that  the  Judge's  reliance  on  the
    respondent's Country Policy and Information Note, Somalia:  (South  and
    Central): Security and humanitarian situation, version  4.0,  September
    2018 ("the September 2018 CPIN") was misplaced.  The  Judge  relied  on
    passages in the September 2018 CPIN which related to clan violence  and
    clan militia in parts of the country other  than  in  Mogadishu  (e.g.,
    [6.4.1] and following), leaving the claimant's home area  of  Mogadishu
    unaffected.   The  judge  quoted   selectively   from   the   document,
    highlighting the fact that [2.5.16]  stated  that  in  2017,  "conflict
    levels remained high and  the  situation  volatile",  whereas  [2.5.17]
    stated that, "[t]he general  security  situation  across  the  country,
    including in Mogadishu... has improved since MOJ...".

13. The Judge's reliance on UNHCR materials, in particular its publication,
    Position on Returns to Southern and Central  Somalia  (Update  1),  May
    2016,  was  also  misplaced,  submits  the  presenting   officer.    By
    definition, the UNHCR is concerned  with  the  return  of  unsuccessful
    asylum seekers and has a broader remit than the  narrow  focus  of  the
    Tribunal, pursuant to the 1951 Convention.  Returnees  do  not  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution. The approach of  the  UNHCR  must  by
    analysed against that background (LP (Sri Lanka) CG [2007] UKAIT  00076
    at [148] and [203]), contend the grounds.  As such, the Judge erred  by
    treating the UNHCR approach as authoritative.

14. At [43], the Judge quoted the UNHCR's reliance on an extract  from  the
    respondent's Country Policy and Information Note:  Somalia  (South  and
    Central): Security and humanitarian situation, version 3.0,  July  2017
    ("the July 2017 CPIN") in its letter dated 22 February  2018,  sent  to
    the respondent pursuant to the process contained in paragraph  358C  of
    the Immigration Rules.  At [7.1.2], the July 2017  CPIN  itself  relied
    upon and quoted the 2016  US  State  Department's  report  on  Somalia,
    stating that deaths had resulted from  African  Union  troops  clashing
    with Al-Shabaab, and from clashes between clan forces and Al-Shabaab in
    the Galmudug, Lower Shabell and Hiraan regions.   The  claimant's  home
    area  of  Mogadishu  is  unaffected  by  those  clashes,  contends  the
    presenting officer.  Moreover, minority clans such as  the  appellant's
    do not have their own  militia,  meaning  the  inter-clan  rivalry  and
    clashes with  Al-Shabaab  are  unlikely  to  affect  the  claimant,  as
    suggested by a proper reading and application of MOJ.

15. The presenting officer also criticises the Judge for  relying  upon  an
    extract from the Danish Refugee Council's 2017 report,  quoted  by  the
    UNHCR and the July 2017 CPIN.  The extract  states  that  Mogadishu  is
    under "constant  threat"  from  Al-Shabaab  and  is  considered  to  be
    infiltrated by it.  The Judge did not have sight of  the  full  report,
    and the extract relied upon by the Judge also noted that  the  security
    situation had "significantly improved"  when  compared  to  the  1990s.
    Taken at its highest, the report noted that the  current  situation  is
    "blurred" which, contends the presenting officer,  is  an  insufficient
    basis to merit departure from MOJ.

16. The presenting officer also submits that, even  if  the  areas  outside
    Mogadishu have descended into  unrest  and  persecutory  practices,  it
    would be speculative to  assume  that  Mogadishu  itself  is  infected.
    Pursuant to MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2018] EWCA Civ 994 at [2(1)], it is not necessary for the  country  of
    origin to have a system of government or an effective legal system  for
    protecting basic human rights.

17. For the claimant, Ms  Moffatt  submits  that  Judge  Bird  applied  the
    correct legal test for cessation of refugee  status,  took  account  of
    relevant evidence, and gave sound reasons for departing from  MOJ.   As
    such,  the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  may  only   succeed   on
    rationality grounds.  While  another  judge  may  have  approached  the
    matter differently, it is trite law that an appellate court should  not
    interfere with findings of fact simply because  it  takes  a  different
    view of the facts.  This is not a  case  where  the  Judge  below  made
    findings which no reasonable judge could have made.  Her findings  were
    not irrational, and this Tribunal should find  no  error  of  law,  she
    submits.  The Judge set  out  the  objective  materials  to  which  her
    attention  had  been  drawn:  the  extracts  from  the  Danish  Refugee
    Council's report, set out above, the September 2017 and 2018 CPINs, and
    extracts from the UNHCR position paper and the other  materials  quoted
    by the UNHCR.

18. Ms Moffatt submits that the revocation of protection status calls for a
    high and exacting test.  Although the test for  cessation  mirrors  the
    test for the recognition  of  refugee  status,  there  are  significant
    procedural differences.  The evidence must demonstrate the  significant
    and non-temporary nature of the  changes  in  the  country  of  origin.
    There must have been permanent changes.  MOJ itself, at five years  old
    and overtaken by events, was incapable of being  determinative  of  the
    individual fact-specific assessment required in the present matter.

Legal framework

Recognition as a refugee

19. Under the  Refugee  Convention,  a  person  will  be  recognised  as  a
    "refugee" if that person:

         "...owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for  reasons  of
         race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social
         group  or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of   his
         nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is  unwilling  to
         avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having
         a nationality and being outside the country of his former  habitual
         residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing  to  such
         fear,  is  unwilling  to  return  to  it."  (Article  1A(2),   1951
         Convention, as amended by the 1967 Protocol)

    The regime established by the Convention has been adopted at  EU  level
    by a number  of  instruments,  including  the  Qualification  Directive
    (2004/83/EC), which itself has been  implemented  domestically  through
    the  Refugee  or   Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006.  In addition, the  Immigration  Rules
    feature a comprehensive regime for the  recognition  of  refugees,  and
    associated matters.

Cessation

20. Once a person has been recognised as  a  refugee,  the  possibility  of
    their  status  ceasing  is  dealt  with  by  Article  1C  of  the  1951
    Convention.  Significant for present purposes  is  Article  1C(5).   It
    states, where relevant:

         "This Convention shall cease to apply to any person  falling  under
         the terms of section A if:

         [...]

         (5)  He can no longer, because the circumstances in connexion  with
             which he has been recognized  as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of his nationality..."

    Sub-paragraph  (5)  features  an  exception  to  the  above   cessation
    principle which is engaged in the case of a refugee under Article 1A(1)
    (so-called "statutory  refugees",  by  reference  to  the  pre-existing
    international  instruments  under  which  such  persons  were   already
    recognised as refugees prior to the 1951 Convention, in contrast to the
    Article 1A(2) definition, outlined  above).   A  person  benefits  from
    exemption from the cessation principle where they are  able  to  invoke
    compelling reasons arising out of a previous persecution.

21. The "compelling reasons" exception to the cessation principle contained
    in the 1951 Convention is of no application to the present matter,  for
    the following reasons.

         a. First, the claimant was recognised as a  refugee  under  Article
            1A(2) and is not a "statutory refugee").

         b. Secondly, it is not incorporated into domestic law or EU law  in
            a manner which binds this Tribunal.    The  EU  legislature  has
            adopted   a   "re-cast"   Qualification   Directive   (Directive
            2011/95/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council  of  13
            December 2011 on  standards  for  the  qualification  of  third-
            country nationals  or  stateless  persons  as  beneficiaries  of
            international protection, for a uniform status for  refugees  or
            for persons eligible for  subsidiary  protection,  and  for  the
            content of the protection granted).  Article 11(3) of the recast
            Qualification  Directive  applies   the   "compelling   reasons"
            exception to refugees recognised under that directive.  However,
            the United Kingdom has noted opted-in to the  recast  directive.
            See Recital (50) to the recast directive and Protocol  (No.  21)
            to the EU Treaties.  The directive does not bind Denmark either:
            see Recital (51).   As such, the United Kingdom continues to  be
            bound by  the  2004  Qualification  Directive,  which  does  not
            feature a provision which corresponds to the new Article 11(3).

22. The "compelling reasons"  proviso  is,  in  practice,  applied  by  the
    Secretary of State  as  a  general  humanitarian  principle.   See  the
    Secretary of State's Asylum Policy Instruction: revocation  of  refugee
    status, version 4.0, 19 January 2016, part 4.5  (page  26,  appellant's
    bundle).  Where a person has experienced treatment and past persecution
    of particularly grave proportions,  the  policy  recognises  that  such
    persons "cannot reasonably be expected to return".  This is a matter of
    policy, rather than pursuant to the United Kingdom's obligations  under
    the 1951 Convention, as the  Asylum  Policy  Instruction  makes  clear:
    "Application of the 'compelling reasons' exception  is  interpreted  to
    extend beyond the actual words of the provision  to  apply  to  Article
    1A(2) refugees and reflects a general humanitarian principle."

23. In MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 994, the Court of Appeal (Arden LJ, Peter  Jackson  LJ),  held
    that a cessation decision is the mirror image of a decision determining
    refugee status.  This finding followed the judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union in Abdulla and others  (Joined  Cases  C-
    175/08, C-176/08, C-178/08 and C-179/08).  At [2(1)], Arden LJ said:

         "the relevant question is whether there has been a significant  and
         non-temporary change in circumstances  so  that  the  circumstances
         which caused the person to be a refugee have ceased  to  apply  and
         there is no other basis on which he would be held to be a refugee."
         (emphasis added)

    In the same paragraph, she held,

         "[t]he recognising state does not in addition have to be  satisfied
         that the country of  origin  has  a  system  of  government  or  an
         effective legal system for protecting basic  human  rights,  though
         the absence of such systems may of course lead  to  the  conclusion
         that a significant and non-temporary change  in  circumstances  has
         not occurred".

24. The term "significant and non-temporary" may be traced back to  Article
    11(2) of the Qualification Directive.

25. The Court of Appeal found support  for  what  it  termed  at  [47]  the
    "symmetry" between  the  grant  and  cessation  of  refugee  status  in
    Abdulla: see its analysis of that decision at, for  example,  [53]  and
    [54].  In adopting this approach, and presumably in reliance  upon  the
    CJEU's reasoning, the Court of Appeal departed from the conclusions  of
    Lord Brown in Hoxha v Special Adjudicator [2005] UKHL 19 at [65] on the
    same point:

         "Logically, therefore, the approach to the grant of refugee  status
         under  1A(2)  does  not  precisely  mirror  the  approach  to   its
         prospective subsequent withdrawal under 1C(5)..."

26. The issue was recently considered by the Upper Tribunal in AMA (Article
    1C(5) - proviso - internal relocation) Somalia [2019] UKUT 00011 (IAC).
     At [42], Judge Plimmer  highlighted  the  "obvious  differences"  that
    continue to exist between a grant of refugee  status  and  a  cessation
    decision.  When making a claim for asylum; the burden of  proof  is  on
    the claimant.  When taking a cessation decision, the burden is  on  the
    Secretary of State.  Secondly, despite the CJEU's findings which led to
    the Court of Appeal emphasising the symmetrical qualities of a decision
    to grant and a decision to cease  refugee  status,  nothing  that  Lord
    Brown said in  Hoxha  concerning  the  need  to  apply  a  "strict  and
    restrictive" approach to the issue of cessation has been  impugned.   A
    "high and exacting" test must be met, which contrasts with the  benefit
    of the doubt given to asylum claimants.  Although the standard of proof
    is the same for cessation and recognition, in the  case  of  cessation,
    the changes must be of a "significant and non-temporary  nature",  such
    that the factors which formed  the  basis  of  the  refugee's  fear  of
    persecution may be regarded as  having  been  "permanently  eradicated"
    (Abdulla at [73]).

Discussion

27. Although Ground 1 contends that the Judge "fundamentally erred  in  law
    in her approach to the  issue  of  cessation  of  refugee  status",  we
    consider there to be no merit in this criticism.

28. The Judge carefully and accurately set out the relevant legal framework
    governing the cessation of refugee status.   From  [36]  to  [38],  the
    judge outlined the relevant provisions of the 1951 Convention. She then
    summarised the commentary on those provisions contained  in  the  UNHCR
    Handbook on procedures and criteria  for  determining  refugee  status.
    Nothing in the grounds  or  in  the  presenting  officer's  submissions
    highlights any errors in that approach. Although the grounds do seek to
    highlight the "different agenda" of the UNHCR,  properly  analysed  the
    judge's summary of the  UNHCR's  own  summary  of  the  relevant  legal
    principles features no error. For example, at [39] the judge refers  to
    the need for there to be fundamental changes in the  country,  removing
    the basis of  the  fear  for  persecution.  This  correlates  with  the
    approach of the CJEU in Abdulla, and that of the Court of Appeal in  MA
    (Somalia) on the need for there to  be  significant  and  non-temporary
    changes.  At [47] and [48], the judge correctly refers to the  relevant
    provisions of the Qualification Directive, and the  extracts  from  the
    Court of Justice's judgement in Abdulla which were on the point.

29. The Judge correctly identified that the country guidance  case  of  MOJ
    suggested that an ordinary civilian returning to Mogadishu following  a
    period of absence will face no real risk of persecution  or  harm:  see
    [53]. At [55], the Judge noted, and emphasised,  the  findings  in  MOJ
    that there were no operational clan  militia  in  Mogadishu,  and  that
    there was no discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan  members.
    This analysis was against the background of the  Judge  already  having
    recalled, at [21], the relevant paragraphs of MOJ which  were  said  by
    the respondent to indicate that the required change had taken place  in
    Mogadishu.  The relevant paragraphs in MOJ were [337]  -  [340],  [344]
    and [407].   Respectively,  those  paragraphs  concern  the  diminished
    significance of clan affiliation,  the  "economic  boom"  in  Mogadishu
    (which, according to the New York Times, was   "spawning  thousands  of
    jobs that are beginning to absorb young militiamen eager to get out  of
    the killing business..."), and the general risk to "ordinary civilians"
    (see [344]).  No complaint can be made about the Judge's  understanding
    of what would have been required  by  MOJ,  had  the  Judge  not  found
    reasons to depart from it.

30. At [46], the Judge had directed herself that MOJ was binding  upon  the
    Tribunal. Quite properly,  especially  given  the  volatile  and  fluid
    nature of  the  security  situation  in  Somalia  as  outlined  by  the
    background materials, the Judge directed herself that it was  necessary
    to consider whether, since the judgement of the Upper Tribunal in 2014,
    there had been any changes in Somalia. If  so,  the  judge  noted  that
    there may be grounds to conclude that the changes in  Somalia  outlined
    in MOJ were not as fundamental and durable as  had  been  the  case  in
    2014. The judge said that she had to consider whether the  decision  in
    MOJ could be distinguished by further evidence. It is  clear  from  her
    examination of the post-MOJ background materials that the Judge had  in
    mind the need to provide strong reasons, supported by cogent  evidence,
    for departing from MOJ.  No complaint may be made about this aspect  of
    the Judge's analysis.

31. The true complaint  of  the  respondent  relates  not  to  the  Judge's
    approach to the legal framework for the cessation  of  refugee  status,
    but rather to the way in which she applied the legal framework  to  the
    facts of the case.  The essential question is whether  there  had  been
    such significant and non-temporary changes that the circumstances which
    merited the claimant's recognition as a refugee no longer existed.

32. At [56], the Judge said that there had not been sufficient  changes  to
    merit that conclusion.  Although the Judge had noted that MOJ suggested
    that such changes had taken place, the Judge did not consider  that  to
    be determinative of the issue.  Having surveyed the relevant background
    information, she observed in [56] that the decision  in  MOJ  had  been
    promulgated in 2014,  and  that  the  factual  basis  underpinning  its
    conclusions "had largely changed" since then.

33. The presenting officer  contends  that  the  Judge's  reliance  on  the
    background materials to conclude that MOJ was out of date  was  flawed.
    In our view, such a submission can only  succeed  if  the  Judge  acted
    irrationally.

34. We do not consider the Judge's reliance on the July 2017 CPIN  to  have
    been misconceived.  The Judge quoted [7.1.2] in full, and  we  consider
    that it is necessary to do so:

         "The USSD 2016 report summarised the  security  situation  for  the
         twelve months of 2016, 'Conflict  during  the  year  involving  the
         government, militias, AMISOM [African Union  Mission  in  Somalia],
         and al-Shabaab resulted  in  death,  injury,  and  displacement  of
         civilians. Clan-based political violence involved revenge  killings
         and attacks on civilian  settlements.  Clashes  between  clan-based
         forces and with al- Shabaab in the Galmudug,  Lower  Shabelle,  and
         Hiiraan Regions, also resulted in deaths.'" (emphasis added)

35. In our view, this paragraph supports the contention  that  overall  in-
    country  conditions  involving  the  clans  and  clan-based   political
    violence had worsened.

36. First, it is drawn from a trusted and reliable  source:  the  US  State
    Department.  It is the USSD's own pithy summary of  the  12  months  to
    2017.  It merits weight and serious consideration.

37. Secondly, the USSD summary, which the respondent saw fit to cite in his
    July 2017  CPIN  under  the  headings  "Security  Situation  -  general
    overview", features three  strands  to  the  general  deterioration  in
    conditions  in  the  country.   The  first  is  conflict  between   the
    government, militias, AMISOM and al-Shabaab.  The second is  clan-based
    political violence involving revenge killings and attacks  on  civilian
    settlements.  And the third is clashes between clan-based forces and al-
    Shabab, in three distinct regions not including Mogadishu.

38. The first and third strands  in  the  USSD  summary  are  not  directly
    relevant to the Judge's findings, although they do go  to  the  general
    context of lawlessness and the prevalent precarious security situation.
     The second strand is directly on point: clan-based political  violence
    had increased.  Revenge killings and attacks  on  civilian  settlements
    had increased.  This was a separate strand in the USSD's summary to the
    two outlined above, and was not anchored to the  general  risk  arising
    from government and AMISOM clashes with al-Shabaab (first strand),  and
    nor was it anchored to the  specific  areas  outside  Mogadishu  (third
    strand).

39. The threshold for demonstrating that the Judge's findings of fact  were
    irrational is high.  Her reliance on this paragraph of  the  July  2017
    report was not irrational; indeed, the  approach  the  Judge  took  was
    entirely consistent with the USSD's summary of 2016  as  regards  clan-
    based clashes.  It may be that another Judge would have emphasised, for
    example, the report of the UN Under Secretary General  for  Safety  and
    Security's  visit  in  October  2016  (see  [7.1.4],   reporting   some
    reductions in violence),  but  this  Judge's  reliance  on  the  USSD's
    summary for the year in preference to, for example, the Under Secretary
    General's report, was not irrational  or  perverse.   The  respondent's
    Country  Policy  and  Information  notes  often  feature  a  range   of
    background materials on a single topic.  It is the role  of  judges  to
    decide, in light of the evidence  in  the  case  in  the  round,  which
    materials to focus upon in their decisions.  As here, other  background
    materials can be provided.  Judge Bird relied on the same  weighty  and
    reliable source the respondent himself chose to rely upon to  summarise
    the overall security situation.  The second strand of the USSD  summary
    was entirely on point, and the Judge did not fall  into  error  in  her
    reliance upon it.

40. The Judge then  noted  the  Danish  Immigration  Service's  March  2017
    Report.  While it is correct to say that the Judge  did  not  have  the
    full report, she did have available to her the extensive quotes in  the
    UNHCR letter and at  [7.1.7]  of  the  July  2017  CPIN.   Judges  rely
    extensively on  the  respondent's  expertise  in  collating  background
    materials in his Country Policy and  Information  Notes.   It  will  be
    difficult to sustain a criticism that a Judge relied on part of a third-
    party report quoted in a CPIN without recourse to the full document, in
    circumstances when the respondent himself, as author of the CPIN, chose
    to quote selectively from the very same report, and did not furnish the
    First-tier Tribunal with the full report. The respondent chose to quote
    extracts of the Danish report which stated that it is difficult to know
    which  groups  exercise  effective  control  over  certain  areas.   In
    Mogadishu, AMISOM is often  described  as  having  "effective  control"
    during the day, but at night al-Shabaab is reported to have infiltrated
    those  very  same  areas.   Attributing  responsibility  for  the  poor
    security situation was a difficult task: "it is  difficult  to  make  a
    clear demarcation of what areas are under the control  of  what  group,
    and there exists grey areas of mixed or unknown control..."  Later, the
    CPIN records the high numbers of security incidents featuring "unknown"
    perpetrators: see  [7.2.1],  which  records  that  40%  of  victims  of
    recorded violent incidents and fatalities were civilians.

41. We note that the extract of the Danish report referred to in the  UNHCR
    letter characterises the security situation as "blurred". We reject the
    submissions of the presenting officer that  the  description  in  those
    terms  prevented  the  judge  from  departing  from  MOJ:  against  the
    background of instability outlined above, for the security situation to
    be "blurred" it would have  been  surprising  for  the  judge  to  have
    concluded that there had been the necessary non-temporary  and  durable
    change  in  the  security  situation  since  the  recognition  of   the
    claimant's refugee status.  The suggestion that  knowing  who  or  what
    actually controls  Mogadishu  is  difficult  further  demonstrates  the
    rationality of the Judge when adopting this approach.

42. Pausing here, we observe that the Judge's reliance on  UNHCR  materials
    was in the context of quoting third party background  materials  relied
    upon by the UNHCR, rather than deferring to its subjective  views.   No
    error arises from this approach.

43. The presenting officer highlighted [6.4.1] of the September 2018  CPIN.
    Relying in the USSD 2017 report, it states:

         'Clan-based  political  violence  involved  revenge  killings   and
         attacks on civilian settlements. Clashes between clan-based  forces
         and with al-Shabaab in [...] the Galmudug, Lower  Shabelle,  Middle
         Shabelle, Lower Juba, Baidoa, and Hiiraan Regions, also resulted in
         deaths. According to the United Nations, killings by clan  militias
         increased compared with previous  years,  likely  as  a  result  of
         increased tensions following flawed state formation processes.

    The presenting officer  submits  that  the  Judge's  reliance  on  this
    paragraph was erroneous. We disagree. Again, the  format  of  the  USSD
    report extract is in summary form. The first sentence  clearly  records
    clan-based political violence, revenge killings and attacks on civilian
    settlements increasing. Although the second sentence  refers  to  clan-
    based clashes with al-Shabaab in regions not including  Mogadishu,  the
    summary clearly states that such clashes, "also  resulted  in  deaths",
    clearly implying that deaths resulted from these clashes in addition to
    the fatalities arising from the general clan-based  political  violence
    referred to in the first sentence.

44. The USSD report  quoted  at  [6.4.1]  notes  that  the  United  Nations
    reported that  clan  militia  killings  increased  when  compared  with
    previous years, attributing the cause to the failure of state formation
    processes. The potential impact of failed rule of law institutions  and
    other processes on the likelihood of there being  a  non-temporary  and
    durable change was touched upon by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA.   We
    accept that there is no need for there to be a functioning rule of law-
    compliant system of governance in the country of origin.  But, as Arden
    LJ noted in MA, "the absence of such systems may of course lead to  the
    conclusion that a significant and non-temporary change in circumstances
    has not occurred" (at [2(1)]).

45. The presenting officer submitted that, to the extent there had  been  a
    deterioration in the security situation, it did not  affect  Mogadishu,
    which remained under the control of AMISOM troops.  It is true that the
    background  materials  highlight  the  deterioration  in  the   general
    security  situation  in  the  areas  of  South  and   Central   Somalia
    surrounding Mogadishu.  But there  is  no  support  in  the  background
    materials for the contention that  Mogadishu  is  exempt  or  otherwise
    insulated from the increase in security incidents.  Indeed, as outlined
    in the Danish report, there is no clear demarcation  of  responsibility
    for Mogadishu.  Al-Shabaab infiltrates the city at  night.   Clan-based
    clashes and extreme violence have been noted as taking  place  country-
    wide, without distinction.  There is no  support  for  the  proposition
    that Mogadishu remains exempt from  the  risk  of  clan-based  violence
    which led to the appellant's initial recognition as a refugee.

46. The picture that emerges from  the  contemporary  background  materials
    marks a departure from the New York Times description quoted  at  [29],
    above, and also at [344] of MOJ.  The "killing business" from which the
    article said many young men sought to flee seems very much to  be  back
    in action.

47. We were taken to extracts AMA as authority  for  the  proposition  that
    changes may be regarded as non-temporary and durable even if  they  are
    isolated  to  particular  parts  of  the  country.   We  consider  this
    submission to be of little assistance, primarily as we have found  that
    the Judge did not act irrationally in her reliance  on  the  background
    materials when concluding that Mogadishu would not be safe.

48. There is a second reason why AMA  is  of  limited  assistance  in  this
    regard. We consider AMA's support  for  this  proposition  to  be  more
    theoretical than practical.  The headnote states at (2):

         "(2) Changes in a refugee's country of origin affecting  only  part
         of the country may, in principle,  lead  to  cessation  of  refugee
         status, albeit it is difficult to see how  in  practice  protection
         could be said to be sufficiently fundamental and  durable  in  such
         circumstances."

49. At [47], Judge Plimmer said:

         "It is difficult to envisage how and in what circumstances a  well-
         founded fear of persecution can  be  said  to  be  "non-temporary",
         "significant" or  "permanently  eradicated"  in  a  country  for  a
         particular person, wherein it is accepted that... the person cannot
         safely move around the country.  The necessary requirement for  the
         changes to be fundamental and durable is most likely to be  absent.
         It  follows  that  the  availability  of  internal  relocation   is
         generally unlikely to be a  material  consideration  when  applying
         article 1C(5) of the  Refugee  Convention  or  article  11  of  the
         [Qualification Directive]".

50. Applied to the present matter, even if the Judge had erred in  relation
    to  the  safety  of  Mogadishu,  the  well-documented   and   remaining
    difficulties arising from clan militia, inter-clan  violence,  and  the
    general security situation elsewhere in Somalia mean that  it  is  very
    unlikely that the Judge  could  properly  be  said  to  have  erred  in
    relation to the wider position across the remainder of Somalia.

Conclusion

51. In our view, the Judge rationally and accurately surveyed the  security
    landscape in Southern and Central Somalia and Mogadishu,  finding  that
    the clan-based persecution  which  first  caused  the  claimant  to  be
    recognised as a refugee continued  to  exist.   While  this  Tribunal's
    decision in MOJ suggested that matters had changed by 2014,  the  Judge
    correctly considered  whether,  in  the  intervening  five  years,  any
    changes  had  taken  place.   The  background  materials   permit   the
    legitimate view to be taken that there has been a deterioration in  the
    general security situation since then.  The sources relied upon by  the
    Judge  to  reach  that  conclusion  were  relevant,  and  she  did  not
    misunderstand them or otherwise act irrationally.  She  did  so  having
    had in  mind  the  correct  authorities  governing  the  revocation  of
    protection status.  In our view, her conclusion must stand.

52. In light of these findings, it is not  necessary  for  us  to  consider
    whether the Judge erred in relation to her assessment of the Article  3
    issue, which was posited in the alternative.  The appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 19 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
