
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00089/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H k h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (H K H).   A  failure  to  comply
    with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 17 October  1999.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 10 February 2008 with indefinite leave
    to enter on the basis of family reunion with his mother  who  had  been
    granted refugee status in the UK as a member of a  minority  clan  from
    Somalia.   His  mother  has  since  become   a   British   citizen   by
    naturalisation on 21 July 2016.

 4. Between 12 September 2014 and 20 July 2017, the appellant was convicted
    of a number of offences.   Most  recently,  on  20  July  2017  he  was
    convicted of possessing an offensive  weapon  in  a  public  place  and
    possessing an imitation firearm in a public place and was sentenced  to
    concurrent detention and training orders for a total of twelve  months.



 5. As a result of that conviction, the Secretary of State decided that the
    appellant should be subject to deportation.  In order to do  that,  the
    Secretary of State informed the appellant on 9  January  2018  that  he
    intended to revoke his refugee status on the basis that there had  been
    a fundamental  and  non-temporary  change  in  Somalia  such  that  the
    circumstance in connection with which had been recognised as a  refugee
    had ceased to exist.  On 1 May 2018, the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
    decision to revoke the appellant's refugee status  and  to  refuse  his
    human rights claim under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  both  against  the
    decision to revoke his refugee status and to refuse  his  human  rights
    claim, under s.82(1)(b) and (c) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002").

 7. In a determination sent on 19 September 2018, Judge  Trevaskis  allowed
    the appellant's appeal on the basis that he was not satisfied that  the
    respondent had  shown  that  the  conditions  for  cessation  had  been
    established.  The judge made no decision in respect of the  appellant's
    human rights claims.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 9. Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  24
    January 2019, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ  Hanson)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

10. On 8 May 2019, the appellant filed a rule 24 response seeking to uphold
    the judge's decision.

The Law

11. The relevant cessation provision is derived from the Refugee Convention
    in Art 1C(5).  The relevant provisions are also now found in Art 11  of
    the Qualification Directive (Council  Directive  2004/83/EC)  and  para
    339A(v) of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  If suffices  for
    the  purposes  of  these  proceedings  to  set  out  Art  11   of   the
    Qualification Directive which in the following terms:

                                 "Article 11

                                  Cessation

         1.   A third country national or a stateless person shall cease  to
             be a refugee, if he or she:

             ...

             (e)  can no longer, because the  circumstances  in  connection
                  with which he or she has been recognised as a refugee have
                  ceased to exist, continue to refuse to  avail  himself  or
                  herself of the protection of the country of nationality.

         2.   In considering points (e)  and  (f)  of  paragraph  1,  Member
             States  shall  have  regard   to   whether   the   change   of
             circumstances is  of  such  a  significant  and  non-temporary
             nature that the refugee's fear of persecution can no longer be
             regarded as well-founded."

12. That provision was considered by the CJEU in the case  of  Abdulla  and
    Others (joined Cases C-175/08, C-176/08, C-178/08, C-179/08) [2010] ECR
    I-1493.  Abdulla was itself considered by the Court of Appeal in SSHD v
    MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994.

13. In MA (Somalia) the Court of Appeal identified that the issue that  has
    to be established by the Secretary of State in order for the  cessation
    provisions to apply is that the circumstances which form the basis  for
    granting protection no longer existed  and  that  there  was  no  other
    reason for the individual to have a well-founded fear  of  persecution.
    Secondly, the change of circumstances  must  be  significant  and  non-
    temporary.  Thirdly, humanitarian standards were not  the  test  for  a
    cessation decision.  The fact that an individual's return might  breach
    his or her human rights (for example under Arts 3 or 8 of the ECHR) did
    not prevent a cessation decision since  that  was  focused  exclusively
    upon  whether  the  appellant's  return  would   breach   the   Refugee
    Convention.  Whether an individual's return would  breach  his  or  her
    human rights was an independent matter to be considered apart from, and
    outside of, the issue of cessation and revocation of refugee status.

The Judge's Reasoning

14.  In  his  determination,  Judge  Trevaskis  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    revocation of the appellant's refugee status at paras 95-101.  At  para
    95, the judge recognised that the basis upon which  the  appellant  had
    been granted refugee  status  was  because  of  his  and  his  mother's
    membership of a minority clan.  The judge said this:

         "95. The decision to seek to  revoke  the  refugee  status  of  the
             appellant has been taken by the respondent  in  reliance  upon
             paragraph 339A(v), namely that the appellant  can  no  longer,
             because the circumstances in connection with which he has been
             recognised as a refugee have  ceased  to  exist,  continue  to
             refuse to avail himself of the protection of  the  country  of
             nationality.  He was granted refugee status as a member of the
             family of his mother, who was granted refugee  status  because
             of her membership of a minority clan,  of  which  her  son  is
             therefore also a member."

15. Then, at para 97 he considered the circumstances  which  the  appellant
    would face if returned to Mogadishu by reference to the factors set out
    by the Upper Tribunal in the  country  guidance  decision  of  MOJ  and
    Others (Return to Mogadishu) CG [2014] UKUT 442  at  [407(viii)].   The
    judge said this:

         "97. Consideration of revocation of refugee status  can  only  have
             regard to conditions prevailing in the country of return,  and
             whether the respondent has discharged her burden of  proof  of
             showing that there has been a fundamental and  durable  change
             in the circumstances which will be faced by the  appellant  on
             return, which will mean that he will no longer  have  a  well-
             founded  fear  of  persecution.   The   starting   point   for
             consideration of  risk  on  return  is  the  country  guidance
             decision of MOJ.  Having regard to these factors, my  findings
             are as follows:

             circumstances in Mogadishu before departure  -  the  appellant
             lived 30 km from Mogadishu with a woman he believed to be  his
             maternal grandmother, but who his mother says was his maternal
             great aunt, without experiencing any problems until he left in
             2008;

             length of absence from Mogadishu - the appellant has been away
             for approximately 10 years;

             family or clan associations to call upon in  Mogadishu  -  the
             appellant claims to have very little knowledge  of  family  or
             clan connections in Mogadishu, his mother says that there  are
             no family or clan members who will be able to support him;  in
             any event, it is accepted that the appellant is a member of  a
             minority clan, which, according to country guidance, may  have
             little to offer.

             access to financial resources  and  prospects  of  securing  a
             livelihood - according to the evidence which I have  accepted,
             the appellant himself has no access to money, other than  from
             his mother, he has no skills, no education, no work experience
             and little apparent self-discipline, which  mean  that  he  is
             likely  to  be  at  a  significant  disadvantage  in   finding
             employment, even in the economic boom  which  is  said  to  be
             taking place in Mogadishu, his access  to  employment  is  not
             likely to be enhanced by his criminal convictions;  given  the
             lack of family support or clan support likely to be  available
             in Mogadishu, I find that he will have no access to  financial
             resources there;

             availability of remittances  from  abroad  -  the  appellant's
             mother is in receipt of benefits; she has stated that she  has
             a half-sister in London, whose husband works; the  appellant's
             cousin's husband in Bristol is a taxi driver and supports  his
             wife and three children,  and  also  has  no  spare  money  to
             support the appellant in Somalia;

             means of support in the United Kingdom - the appellant arrived
             as a child, and has been dependent for his lawful income  upon
             his mother; it appears that he has been able  to  finance  his
             drug habit of �70 a week, and it is likely that  he  has  done
             this by criminal activity; he is now 18  years  old,  and  has
             done nothing to acquire skills which will enable him  to  find
             employment, when he is permitted to undertake it; his claim to
             have enrolled in a vocational course of education has not been
             substantiated by documentation, and I attach no weight to  his
             oral evidence about that;

             funding of his journey from Somalia and financial  support  on
             return - I find is a fact  that  the  appellant  came  to  the
             United Kingdom under the  family  reunion  policy;  his  entry
             clearance was granted without payment  of  the  fee,  and  his
             airfare was paid, presumably by a family member; however, that
             does not alter my view that there is likely to be  no  funding
             available from the same source, or any other  source,  on  his
             return."

16. Then at paras 98-100 the judge set out his reasons for finding at  para
    101 that he was not satisfied that the respondent had  shown  that  the
    conditions of cessation had been established.  The judge said this:

         "98. I have considered the submission by the respondent that  there
             is evidence of a change of circumstances which will justify me
             in departing from the country guidance.  These submissions are
             largely based upon the suggestion that the appellant  will  be
             able to receive support from family  or  clan  members,  whose
             existence he and his mother have sought to conceal.  Had these
             circumstances existed  when  the  appellant's  mother  claimed
             asylum, she would presumably have  been  refused.   Subsequent
             developments in Somalia  have  meant  that  the  situation  of
             minority clans has become worse, rather than better.  However,
             in  accordance  with  the  respondent's  country   policy,   I
             recognise that the risk faced by the appellant on return  will
             not be by reason of his ethnicity or  social  group  alone;  I
             have additionally found that  there  is  no  support  networks
             there for him, and largely due to his own fault, he will  have
             no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood, and  will
             therefore face difficult living conditions, to say the  least.
             I am satisfied to the required standard that he will  have  no
             choice but to live in an IDP camp, where he will be at risk of
             persecution on the basis of his social group or ethnic origin,
             or any of the other reasons which I have identified above.   I
             have concluded that there are no circumstances  which  justify
             me in departing from country guidance; the evidence which post
             dates  the  promulgation  of  that  decision,  in   my   view,
             reinforces that guidance, rather than undermining it.

         99.  The respondent is required to prove to the required  standard;
             not only that the appellant does not face a well-founded  fear
             of persecution for the convention  reason  for  which  refugee
             status was originally granted, but  also  that  there  are  no
             other reasons for the appellant to fear protection.  I find no
             evidence that the respondent has  discharged  that  burden  of
             proof to the required standard.

         100.  The  appellant  will   be   returned   to   Mogadishu.    The
             circumstances which he will face on arrival  have  been  fully
             set out  by  UNHCR  in  their  response  to  the  respondent's
             proposal for cessation of refugee  status.   The  information,
             much  of  which  is  repeated  in  the  respondent's   country
             information, shows that Somalia in general, and  Mogadishu  in
             particular, present an unattractive prospect  for  a  returnee
             such  as  this  appellant,  whose  characteristics  have  been
             identified in my findings; he is  in  an  18  year  old  minor
             criminal member of a minority clan with no family clan with no
             family or clan support in Somalia, no skills or education  and
             little prospect of applying  himself  sufficiently  to  obtain
             work in order to render himself economically  self-sufficient;
             there  is  a  high  probability  that  he  would  soon  become
             destitute, whether or not he was able to find  shelter  in  an
             IDP camp; he will additionally  face  a  significant  risk  of
             being targeted as someone who has returned after having  spent
             a significant period of time in the West, and will be  assumed
             to have acquired wealth, thereby making himself  ironically  a
             target for criminal gangs."

The Submissions

17. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in-law in finding that  the  conditions  for  cessation
    were not established because he had  taken  into  account  humanitarian
    factors in concluding that the appellant was still at risk.   This,  Mr
    Howells submitted, was contrary to the approach accepted by  the  Court
    of Appeal  in  MA  (Somalia)  at  [56]  and  [61].   That,  Mr  Howells
    submitted, was exemplified by the judge's reliance on the  factors  set
    out in MOJ and Others.  Secondly, Mr  Howells  submitted  that  to  the
    extent that the judge had found that the appellant would be at risk  of
    persecution for a Convention reason, namely as part of a  social  group
    or because of his ethnic origin if he were to live in an IDP camp,  the
    judge had failed properly to identify the evidence and give reasons why
    such a risk existed.  Mr Howells  acknowledged  that  in  the  relevant
    Country Policy  and  Information  Note,  Somalia:  Majority  clans  and
    minority groups in south and central Somalia (June 2017) the  Secretary
    of State said at para 3.1.4 that:

         "Minority group members who have become IDPs in any part  of  south
         and central Somalia and who have no choice but to live  in  an  IDP
         camp may be at risk of persecution on the  basis  of  their  social
         group or ethnic origin.  Conditions in camps, however, vary and are
         better and established, settled sites - some of which are dominated
         by minority groups, each case will need to  be  considered  on  its
         facts."

18. Mr Howells submitted that the guidance required the judge  to  look  at
    all the circumstances of any particular camp  to  which  the  appellant
    might be driven to live as an IDP and he had not done so.

19. Thirdly, Mr Howells in his reply submitted that the judge in  para  100
    of  his  determination  was  wrong  to  identify  that  there   was   a
    "significant risk" of the appellant being targeted as someone  who  had
    returned from the west and would be assumed to have acquired  a  wealth
    such that he would become a target  for  criminal  gangs.   Mr  Howells
    submitted that that was contrary to the country guidance  case  of  MOJ
    and Others.

20. Fourthly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had failed, in any event,
    to explain why the appellant would  become  destitute  and,  therefore,
    have to live in an IDP camp, in particular following  MOJ  and  Others.
    He had failed to explain why the appellant would not be  able  to  take
    advantage of a 'economic boom' in Mogadishu.

21. Mr Hodgetts, who represented the appellant  relied  upon  his  detailed
    rule 24 response which he developed in his oral submissions.

22. First, Mr Hodgetts submitted that  the  judge  was  well-aware  of  the
    decision in MA  (Somalia)  which  he  summarised  at  para  74  of  his
    decision.  Secondly, he submitted that the judge had correctly reasoned
    that, taking into account the factors set out in MOJ  and  Others,  the
    appellant's circumstances were such that he would end up in an IDP camp
    and, on the basis of the respondent's own CPIN report which  the  judge
    cited at para 76 of his determination, the judge was entitled  to  find
    that the appellant was at risk in an  IDP  camp  as  a  result  of  his
    minority clan status.

23. Thirdly, Mr Hodgetts submitted that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    challenged the judge's finding that the appellant would  be  forced  to
    live in an IDP camp and therefore,  in  any  event,  his  claim  should
    succeed under Art 3.

24. Mr Hodgetts reminded me that the burden of proof was upon the Secretary
    of State to establish the conditions for cessation to apply and,  given
    the Secretary of State's own guidance, the judge had been  entitled  to
    find that the conditions had not changed such  that  the  appellant  no
    longer had a well-founded fear of persecution.

Discussion

25. At para 98 of his decision, the judge recognised that the risk faced by
    the appellant would "not be by reason of his ethnicity of social  group
    alone".  To the extent that the judge meant by this, as had  once  been
    the case, a person who established that they were from a minority  clan
    was at real risk of persecution from majority clans in Somalia, that is
    no longer the case.   That  was  recognised  in  the  country  guidance
    decision of MOJ and Others at [400(g)] where the  Upper  Tribunal  said
    this:

         "The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
         Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
         assistance  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
         protection function than previously.  There are no clan militias in
         Mogadishu, no clan  violence,  and  no  clan  based  discriminatory
         treatment, even for minority clan members."

26. At para 98, the judge having recognised this went on  to  find,  having
    considered the factors set out in MOJ and Others  at  para  97  of  his
    determination, that the appellant had "no  real  prospect  of  securing
    access to a livelihood" and that he would as a result  "face  difficult
    living conditions" and would have no choice "but  to  live  in  an  IDP
    camp".  The judge then went on to find that: "He will  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on the basis of his social group or ethnic origin,  or  any
    of the other reasons which I have identified above."

27. With respect to the judge, this reasoning is  somewhat  confused.   Was
    the risk to the appellant because of his minority clan status within an
    IDP camp or was it because, taken together with that  risk,  or  alone,
    one of the "other reasons" he had identified put him at  risk.   If  it
    were the former, the judge was, no doubt,  placing  reliance  upon  the
    Secretary of State's policy in the CPIN at, in particular,  para  3.14.
    That, however, did not state that a minority clan member was inevitably
    at risk in an IDP  camp  because  of  their  "social  group  or  ethnic
    origin".  That policy statement, and it is of course  not  evidence  in
    itself, was that each case would need to be considered on its own facts
    because conditions in the camps varied.  In para 98, the judge did  not
    grapple with any evidence that  would  establish  that  this  appellant
    would have no  choice  but  to  live  in  an  IDP  camp  in  which  the
    circumstances were such that he would be at risk because of his "social
    group or ethnic origin".  There  is  simply  no  consideration  of  the
    circumstances in any particular camp to which the appellant would  have
    no choice but to live in.

28. To the extent that the judge relies upon "other reasons"  that  he  has
    identified, those are entirely humanitarian factors.  They are that the
    appellant would have no means of support, no financial resources and no
    family or clan connections in Mogadishu such that he would be unable to
    secure access to a livelihood etc.  Those are the  very  factors  which
    the Court of Appeal in MA (Somalia) concluded were not part of the test
    for a cessation decision.  At [56], Arden LJ said:

         "... humanitarian standards  are  not  the  test  for  a  cessation
         decision.  It matters not whether the FTT  had  Article  3  of  the
         Convention in mind or whether  it  simply  took  the  view  that  a
         refugee should not be returned unless the  country  of  origin  now
         protected human rights in general.  The FTT went much further  than
         the QD or the Refugee Convention."

29. Further, at para 100 of his decision, the judge further  conflated  the
    "humanitarian considerations" with the risk factors relevant to a claim
    under the  Refugee  Convention.   Having  identified  the  circumstance
    facing the appellant on return to Somalia the judge said: "there  is  a
    high probability that he would soon become destitute, whether or not he
    was able to find shelter in an IDP camp; ...".  Then, turning to  what,
    on the face of it, looks like a relevant risk factor for  international
    protection the judge said this:

         "He will additionally face a significant risk of being targeted  as
         someone who has returned after having spent a significant period of
         time in the West, and will be  assumed  to  have  acquired  wealth,
         thereby making himself, ironically, a target for criminal gangs."

30. The first reason is not a  relevant  one  in  determining  whether  the
    requirements for cessation have been established.   The  second  reason
    may be but, as Mr Howells submitted in his reply, that  risk  flies  on
    the face of the Upper  Tribunal's  conclusion  in  MOJ  and  Others  at
    [407(a)] when referring to an ordinary citizen returning  to  Mogadishu
    that:

         "He will not be at real risk simply on account of having lived in a
         European location for a period of time being viewed with  suspicion
         either by the authorities or a possible supporter of Al-Shabaab  or
         by Al-Shabaab as an apostate or someone whose Islamic integrity has
         been compromised by living in a Western country."

31. Both reasons, therefore, cannot found the judge's conclusion  that  the
    circumstances on return to Mogadishu would leave the appellant at  real
    risk of persecution for a Convention reason.

32. I do not accept Mr Hodgetts' submission that the Secretary of State  is
    in difficulty in showing there has been a change of circumstances  when
    the CPIN recognises that there may be a risk in an IDP camp based  upon
    clan origins.  First, that is a policy  statement  and  not  in  itself
    evidence.  Secondly, in any event, the fact that there may be a risk in
    some camps to minority clan members did not entitle the judge  to  make
    the positive finding that this appellant would be at  risk  in  an  IDP
    camp without identifying and grappling with the evidence and  tying  it
    to the appellant's potential IDP camp destination near Mogadishu.   The
    fact of the matter is that the refugee status of the appellant and  his
    mother was not based upon the risk to him as a minority clan member  in
    an IDP camp but rather, at large, in Mogadishu (or Afgoye)  from  which
    he  comes,  (some  30   kilometres   away   from   Mogadishu).    Those
    circumstances have, as MOJ and Others recognises, changed  and  were  a
    change of circumstance of a "significant and non-temporary nature".  To
    the extent that the judge was concerned with identifying a real risk to
    the appellant as a minority clan member on return to  Somalia  now,  he
    was addressing a new risk to the appellant, albeit one that  was  still
    based upon his clan membership.  But, the  circumstances  of  any  such
    risk was new and different from that upon which he and his  mother  had
    been granted refugee status.  It is simply not possible to  discern  on
    the basis of what evidence the judge reached his  view  concerning  any
    risk  to  the  appellant  in  an  IDP  based  upon  his  minority  clan
    membership.

33.  For  these  reasons,  therefore,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    conclusion that the Secretary of State had  not  established  that  the
    conditions for cessation have been established was legally flawed and I
    set it aside.

34. Mr Hodgetts invited me to conclude that the appellant  should,  in  any
    event, succeed under Art 3.  That, of course, would not be relevant  to
    the decision to revoke  the  appellant's  refugee  status.   It  is  an
    independent and freestanding issue as the Court of Appeal recognised in
    MA (Somalia).  There are two reasons why I do not accept  Mr  Hodgetts'
    submission.  First, the judge has made no finding in relation to Art  3
    other than he concluded that the appellant would be forced to  live  in
    an IDP camp.  Whether that would breach Art 3  of  the  ECHR,  assuming
    that finding stands, required consideration of what  was  said  by  the
    Court of Appeal in MA (Somalia) in respect of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    earlier decision in Said v SSHD [2016] Imm AR 1084, especially at [63]-
    [64] as to the circumstances in which a breach of Art 3 may arise  from
    an absence of "basic living standards" in an individual's home country.



35. Finally, Mr Hodgetts invited me, if the appeal was to  be  remitted  or
    the decision remade in the Upper  Tribunal,  to  preserve  the  judge's
    finding in para 98 based upon his consideration of the factors  in  MOJ
    and Others at para 97 of his decision that the appellant would have  no
    choice but to live in an IDP camp.   Mr  Hodgetts  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State had not challenged that finding.  I  do  not  accept
    that submission.  It is clear in  para  13  of  the  grounds  that  the
    Secretary of State contended that the judge's finding  failed  to  take
    into account and explain why the appellant would not have access to the
    "economic boom" in Mogadishu which the UT in MOJ and Others  considered
    to be a relevant factor in determining the appellant's circumstances on
    return (see [407(h)] of  MOJ  and  Others).   That  issue  is  directly
    relevant as to whether or not, as the  judge  found  in  para  98,  the
    appellant would have no choice but to live in an IDP camp.

36. Mr Howells, relying upon the grounds, placed weight upon what was  said
    by the Upper Tribunal in AAW [2015] UKUT 0673 (IAC) at [59] that:

         "All of this indicates that the appellant would be a person who, in
         seeking low-skilled work in Mogadishu would  have  advantages  over
         those without anything to show a prospective employer, particularly
         given his construction qualifications.  The reasons offered  as  to
         why the appellant would have no prospect of securing work on return
         do not stand up to scrutiny."

37. Mr Hodgetts submitted that AAW was not a country guidance case and  the
    judge was not referred to it and required to take it into account.   He
    gave, Mr Hodgetts submitted, adequate reasons and  reached  a  rational
    conclusion  in  para  97  that,   given   the   appellant's   lack   of
    qualifications and work experience, he was, even in the economic  boom,
    unlikely to obtain employment.  Mr Howells accepted that he  no  longer
    relied upon the financial support that the appellant might obtain  from
    the Facilitated Returns Scheme.

38. I have set out above the judge's assessment of why, in  his  view,  the
    appellant would not be able to take advantage of  the  "economic  boom"
    given  his  lack  of  skills,  education,  work  experience  and  self-
    discipline.  That, at least, differentiates  this  appellant  from  the
    appellant in AAW who had construction qualifications.

39. In my judgment, there is no basis made out in the grounds  for  setting
    aside the judge's findings in para 97 and finding  in  98,  based  upon
    those findings, that the appellant will have no choice but to  live  in
    an IDP camp on return to Mogadishu.  Subject, therefore, to  compelling
    evidence requiring a judge when remaking the decision to revisit  these
    findings, in remaking the decision in respect of the revocation of  the
    appellant's refugee status and whether  his  return  to  Somalia  would
    breach Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR, the judge's findings in  para  97  and
    the finding in para 98 that the appellant would have no choice  but  to
    live in an IDP camp shall stand.

Decision

40. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal against the revocation  of  his  refugee  status
    involved a material error of law.  That decision cannot stand.

41. The decision in relation to the revocation of the  appellant's  refugee
    status and whether he returned to Somalia would breach Arts 3 and/or  8
    of the ECHR must be remade.  There has, in fact, been no decision  made
    in relation to either Art 3 or Art 8.  In the light of  that,  and  the
    extent of the fact-finding still required, I remit the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to  remake  the  decision  to  the  extent  I  have
    indicated at [39] above; the appeal to be heard by a judge  other  than
    Judge Trevaskis.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                11 June 2019
