
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: RP/00009/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 June 2021                                 |On 4 August 2021              |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JARVIS

                                   Between

                                     A A
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of the proceedings. We  find  that
it is appropriate to continue the order. We make clear  that  the  order  is
not made to protect the appellant's reputation following his conviction  for
a particularly serious criminal  offence,  but  because  the  case  involves
consideration of protection issues. Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.


Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr O. Sobowale, instructed by Morgan & Wiseman
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Burundi who entered the  UK  on  12  July
    2003 with his mother. She claimed asylum on arrival with  her  children
    as dependents. The appellant was 11 years old when he  arrived  in  the
    UK.


 2. A copy of his mother's witness statement, which was produced in support
    of her asylum claim, stated that  she  was  raised  in  Bujumbura.  His
    mother described herself as a Hutu, but of mixed ethnicity. Her  father
    was  a  Hutu,  but  her  mother  was  mixed  Tutsi(father)/Hutu(mother)
    ethnicity. She explained that a person  would  normally  be  identified
    through their paternal ethnicity. The appellant's mother  worked  as  a
    market trader and owned a house in Rohero,  Bujumbura.  She  was  never
    married to the father  of  her  three  children.  He  was  Tutsi.  They
    separated in early 1995 when she was pregnant with her third child.


 3. The appellant's mother described the political developments in Burundi,
    which led to election  of  the  first  Hutu  president  in  June  1993.
    Melchior  Ndadaye  and  several  other  high-ranking  politicians  were
    assassinated in October 1993 during an  attempted  coup  led  by  Tutsi
    military officers. The coup attempt was the catalyst for mass  killings
    on  ethnic  lines,  which  developed  into  an  ongoing  conflict.  The
    appellant's mother said that she feared for her  children  because  she
    was at risk of being killed by Tutsis.  Her  children  were  vulnerable
    because Hutus would not accept  them,  and  extreme  Tutsis  would  not
    accept them because their mother was Hutu. She said that  the  violence
    intensified during 1994 and into 1995.

 4. In April 1995 her home was raided by Tutsi soldiers who accused her  of
    being a 'Hutu rebel collaborator'. They ordered her to leave  the  zone
    or face the consequences. When her eldest son tried to help  her,  they
    cut him with a knife. She later found out that it was  likely  to  have
    been a neighbour who was the leader of the Sans Echec Tutsi militia who
    denounced her to Tutsi soldiers. She was displaced with other Hutus  to
    a camp in Gatumba zone, where they lived in poor conditions. After  the
    Tutsi soldiers regained control in a coup and  reinstalled  the  former
    Tutsi president, Paul Buyoya, in 1996, and  the  violence  appeared  to
    subside, she thought it might be safe to return home. After only a week
    the house was attacked with a grenade. Again, she thought this was done
    by the Sans Echec militia. She said that she was  only  able  to  avoid
    further persecution by paying members of the militia  regular  sums  of
    money to avoid the accusation that she was a rebel collaborator.

 5. In April 2003 Domitien Ndayizeye, a Hutu, became President following  a
    three-year power sharing agreement. The  main  Hutu  rebel  groups  had
    refused to sign the Arusha Accord. The appellant's mother said that she
    was anxious about the situation because in the past the Tutsi dominated
    army tried to assert their power by persecuting Hutu civilians  when  a
    Hutu was President. In May 2003 she was arrested by Tutsi  soldiers  on
    the pretext that she was suspected of helping the Hutu rebels. She  was
    able to escape on payment of a bribe.  She  was  not  released  through
    official channels. She fled the area with her children because she  was
    frightened that she would be arrested again. Fighting continued between
    the competing forces. She feared that her  children  were  particularly
    vulnerable to being targeted by both  sides  because  they  were  mixed
    ethnicity. She travelled to Uganda because she heard that there was  an
    agent there who could assist her. She had to  return  to  Bujumbura  in
    July 2003 to sell more of her property so  that  she  could  afford  to
    travel to the UK. When she returned to  Bujumbura  hundreds  of  people
    were killed or injured in heavy fighting and many people  had  to  flee
    the area.


 6. The account given by the appellant and his mother  is  consistent  with
    the background evidence relating to events in Burundi at the time.  The
    appellant says that he witnessed traumatic  events  as  a  young  child
    including having seen a man's head being split open  with  a  rock  and
    seeing corpses and body parts by the side of the road  on  his  way  to
    school. He remembers grenades and gun shots. He described this level of
    violence as 'normal'. In a  report  dated  29  July  2019  Dr  Mohammed
    Shaffiullha, a consultant  psychiatrist,  diagnosed  the  appellant  as
    suffering from Mixed Anxiety  and  Depressive  Disorder  and  co-morbid
    Complex Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). This is consistent  with
    the experiences the appellant has  described.  The  appellant  told  Dr
    Shaffiullha that he was teased because of his lighter skin  colour  and
    called names like 'mzungu' ('white person'). He was  bullied  by  local
    children and threatened if he did not steal items for them  from  local
    shops or from his mother. He told  Dr  Shaffiullha  that  he  witnessed
    atrocities in Burundi. People were killed with guns and knives  outside
    their house. He witnessed people being burned alive and  looting.  They
    slept in the corridor at night because there was shooting outside.

 7. The appellant's mother left Burundi with her three children on 11  July
    2003 and flew to the UK via Ethiopia. She claimed  asylum  on  arrival.
    She was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) as  a  refugee  on  04
    September 2003 with her children as her dependents.

Criminal offending

 8. As a juvenile the appellant was convicted of several offences including
    robbery, taking a motor vehicle  without  consent,  and  actual  bodily
    harm. None of the offences attracted a custodial sentence  save  for  a
    robbery committed in 2008 for which he  was  sentenced  to  a  10-month
    detention and training order. All were committed when he was  under  18
    years old. Although concerning, they were not  considered  sufficiently
    serious for the respondent to consider deportation action.


 9. The appellant was not convicted of any further offences for four years.
    The index  offence  was  far  more  serious  and  constituted  a  major
    departure from his previous  offending.  On  30  January  2015  he  was
    convicted of one count of kidnapping, one count of false  imprisonment,
    and one count of blackmail. We will not set out the full details of the
    offence to maintain anonymity save to say that it  was  a  particularly
    serious crime whereby the victim was kidnapped and physically  tortured
    by the appellant and his associates in an attempt to extort money.  The
    very serious nature  of  the  offence  was  reflected  in  the  15-year
    sentence of imprisonment imposed by the judge, which was later  reduced
    to 13 years and 6 months by the Court of Appeal.

10. The sentencing judge outlined  the  extremely  serious  nature  of  the
    offence. The appellant was directly involved in inflicting at least one
    deliberate act of  severe  torture.  The  judge  noted  that  he  would
    normally begin sentencing in the range of 18-20  years.  He  took  into
    account the fact that  the  appellant  and  his  co-defendants  pleaded
    guilty, albeit only after the victim had given evidence, but  at  least
    before he was subjected to cross-examination, and that  they  expressed
    remorse. Nevertheless, the crime was so serious it  still  attracted  a
    substantial custodial sentence.

11. At the date of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the appellant  had
    been released on licence to approved accommodation and is subject to  a
    stringent set of licence conditions. In preparation for his release the
    OASys assessment was updated on 29 March 2021.  The assessor  from  the
    National  Probation  Service  (NPS)  conducted  a  full  Layer  3  risk
    assessment considering a range of static and dynamic risk factors.

12. The  Offender  Group  Reconvictions  Scale  (OGRS)  score  provides  an
    assessment of static factors relating to the appellant's past offending
    history as an indicator of the likelihood of future offending. The OGRS
    3 score for general offending within one year of his community sentence
    was 32% and was 49% within two years. The appellant told  the  assessor
    that he and his co-defendants  planned  the  kidnap  because  they  had
    information that the victim earned a lot of  money  through  fraudulent
    activity. She noted that the main driver for the crime appeared to be a
    financial motive but  given  its  serious  nature  the  appellant  also
    demonstrated a willingness to use violence.  There  may  have  been  an
    element of excitement generated by his involvement in  such  a  serious
    plan. In relation to the  serious  act  of  torture  inflicted  by  the
    appellant he explained that he wanted to 'speed up  the  process'.  The
    assessor noted that the appellant said that he knew  what  he  did  was
    wrong 'however his focus appeared to be centered (sic) more so  on  the
    effects this had on him and his associates, as opposed to the traumatic
    effects this has likely had to the victim'. The assessor concluded that
    'whilst [he] is able to take some responsibility for his  part  in  the
    commission of the offence, he  was  unable  to  fully  demonstrate  his
    awareness of the effects his behaviour would have had on the victim, at
    that time and in the future'.


13. In considering other dynamic factors relating to  education,  training,
    and employability the assessor noted that  the  appellant  had  a  good
    attitude towards gaining qualifications and  enhancing  his  education.
    However,  he  did  not  demonstrate  a  willingness  to  obtain  stable
    employment. Before going into custody he was self-employed  buying  and
    selling items online. At one  point  the  appellant  asserted  that  he
    wanted to pursue a career in computer programming but appeared to  have
    little knowledge about it or what it would involve.  In  a  pre-release
    interview in February 2021 he said that he wanted to  get  involved  in
    importing and exporting coffee and needed �5,000 to make it viable. The
    assessor noted that it was  unlikely  that  he  would  have  legitimate
    access to this money. He also said that he wanted to try  and  start  a
    business importing t-shirts from India before he went  to  prison,  but
    this venture lost money. The appellant  did  not  appear  to  have  any
    aspirations to work for anyone else. Although he said that he would  be
    willing to work in the gig economy (e.g. delivery work) to  save  money
    the assessor could not see how he would do this when he did not have  a
    current driving licence.


14. The assessment went on to consider financial management and income as a
    potential risk factor and concluded that financial issues  were  linked
    to the risk of serious harm and his offending behaviour. The assessment
    noted that he was likely to have significant financial problems because
    he was not permitted to work because of his immigration  status.  As  a
    result, he was likely to be reliant on family and  friends.  Given  the
    link between his offending and his desire for financial gain, financial
    issues would need to be carefully monitored to ensure that he  did  not
    seek financial gain through illegal means.

15. The appellant's lifestyle and associates were  factors  linked  to  his
    offending behaviour. The records indicated that he  may  have  previous
    affiliations to the EC gang. His anti-social peer group was  likely  to
    extend beyond those involved in the index  offence.  Returning  to  his
    local area was deemed to be problematic. Although  he  was  willing  to
    move to another area, this was unlikely  to  be  possible  due  to  his
    immigration problems. Cannabis use was also considered  a  risk  factor
    that might affect his financial position if not working and may  impact
    on the risk of acquisitive offending.

16. A factor that was noted but not explored in any detail due to  lack  of
    information, was the appellant's assertion that he suffered from  PTSD.
    It is clear from the OASys report that he did not want to disclose  the
    underlying reasons for PTSD although Dr Shaffiullha's report could have
    been made available to the assessor if the appellant had wanted her  to
    understand this issue more fully. Section  10.8  of  the  OASys  report
    stated:

           '[He] disclosed to me that he has been suffering  from  symptoms
           of   Post-traumatic   Stress   Disorder   (insomnia,    anxiety,
           hypervigilance etc). [He] did not wish to discuss the  cause  of
           this condition but says that earlier in his  sentence  he  spoke
           with the MHIT about these issues,  thought  there  has  been  no
           mental health support since the start of Covid. [He]  says  that
           at one point he felt he was addicted to sleeping pills but  this
           is no longer the case and he  is  not  prescribed  any  form  of
           medication at present. It may be [he] will be  more  comfortable
           to discuss the issues that led up to his  PTSD  symptoms  as  he
           gets to know his supervising  PO  on  release.  Until  then,  he
           admitted that some of his issues are  ongoing,  thought  he  has
           read books on PTSD so feels that he is making  some  headway  in
           "having it under control". While it is  important  to  recognise
           these  issues  with  [his]   emotional   wellbeing,   with   the
           information available at present (& [his] reluctance to give any
           more detail) there  is  no  clear  link  between  this  and  his
           offending behaviour/serious harm. I would  assess  that  despite
           this, this area warrants attention in [his] sentence  plan  upon
           release, especially  since  his  immigration  problems  will  do
           nothing to assist his mental health and emotional equilibrium.'


17. In assessing the factors that might increase the risk of  serious  harm
    Section 10.3 of the report stated that the risk would increase  if  the
    appellant resumed contact with pro-criminal peers or had no  legitimate
    means of securing finances. Whilst he  was  not  assessed  to  pose  an
    'immediate risk of serious harm' upon release the  risk  factors  would
    need to be managed through the use of a robust risk management plan  as
    well as interventions to address his attitudes, thinking and behaviour.




18. Having considered the static and dynamic risk  factors  the  assessment
    concluded that the Offender General Predictor (OGP) score  relating  to
    the probability of proven non-violent reoffending was 38% within 1 year
    and 53% within 2 years placing him in the 'medium' risk  category.  The
    Offender Violent Predictor (OVP) score relating to the  probability  of
    proven violent reoffending was 21% within a 1 year  and  33%  within  2
    years placing him in the 'medium' risk category.  Although  the  scores
    for the static risk factors placed him in a 'low' risk  category,  when
    the professional assessment of the offender manager took  into  account
    the dynamic risk factors, the overall risk of reoffending posed by  the
    appellant rose to 'medium', and if he did reoffend, there  was  a  high
    risk of serious harm to members of the public due to the serious nature
    of the index offence.


19. The OASys  report  noted  that  the  appellant  completed  the  RESOLVE
    programme in prison and was suitable for other  rehabilitative  courses
    relating to thinking and behaviour. Despite the best endeavours of  the
    appellant's representatives, and a direction to the  relevant  Offender
    Management Unit (OMU) to produce a  full  copy  of  the  post-programme
    report, only a partial copy including every other page was available in
    the bundle. The report showed that he completed  the  course  March-May
    2019. The limitations of  having  an  incomplete  report  are  obvious.
    Although some of the sections  outline  positive  engagement  with  the
    course, and highlight progress where  warranted,  it  is  difficult  to
    assess the overall outcome without a full  copy,  which  might  include
    sections where a lack of progress was noted. The report noted that  the
    appellant had disclosed to the group that he was 'exposed  to  acts  of
    violence that included  people  being  openly  killed  as  Burundi  was
    involved in a civil war'. He mentioned that when he moved to the UK  he
    thought that the  other  pupils  within  the  school  'were  "soft"  in
    comparison to himself who he saw as being  fearless.  It  was  positive
    that [he] linked being fearless into his person factors (sic) which  in
    turn became part of his identity/reputation.' Given  that  the  RESOLVE
    report pre-dated the most up to date OASys assessment it seems  strange
    that the assessor did not pick up on the underlying cause  of  PTSD  or
    explore how this might be linked to violent offending behaviour of this
    kind.

Deportation proceedings

20. The appellant was notified of his liability to deportation on  26  July
    2017 and invited to  make  representations,  which  were  sent  to  the
    respondent on 18 August  2017.  On  16  November  2017  the  respondent
    notified the appellant of  her  intention  to  revoke  refugee  status.
    Further representations were made on 20 November 2017. On  05  December
    2017 the UNHCR  was  invited  to  express  its  view  on  the  proposed
    cessation of refugee status, which it did in  correspondence  dated  26
    January 2018. No further action was taken until 30 January  2019,  when
    the appellant was  served  with  a  signed  deportation  order  and  an
    appealable decision to refuse a protection and human rights claim.  The
    respondent certified that there was a presumption  that  the  appellant
    posed a danger to the community with reference to  section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('NIAA 2002').


21. For the purpose of this decision, it is only necessary to summarise the
    reasons given for ceasing refugee status because the Upper Tribunal  is
    only remaking on protection and Article 3 grounds.

22. The decision letter referenced, but did not quote  directly  from,  the
    'COI Response Burundi -  Political  system  and  affiliation  (16  June
    2017)' and the 'COI Response Burundi  -  Religion;  ethnicity  -  Tutsi
    tribe (28 April 2017)' The respondent accepted that a  Burundian  child
    usually inherits its ethnic identity from its father but asserted  that
    a child of mixed ethnicity could 'also choose  to  be  a  part  of  his
    mother's ethnic group as long as its members are accepting.' The  exact
    source of this information  was  unclear.  It  was  asserted  that  the
    government of Burundi targets those who oppose  the  current  President
    regardless of whether they are Hutu or Tutsi.  The  appellant  was  not
    politically active and would not come to the adverse attention  of  the
    authorities. On return he would have the 'choice of adopting either  of
    your parents (sic) ethnicity and you also have the option of  remaining
    "neutral".' The respondent referred to the  letter  dated  16  November
    2017 and asserted that the circumstances that gave rise to the original
    grant of refugee status no longer existed.

23. The respondent noted the UNHCR opinion that the  general  security  and
    human rights situation in Burundi has not improved in a fundamental and
    durable way for the purpose of applying Article 1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention and repeated the previous reasons given for concluding  that
    the appellant would no longer be at risk on return.

First-tier Tribunal decision

24. The appellant appealed the decision. The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed
    the appeal on protection  grounds  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    Article 3. The judge  considered  the  incomplete  RESOLVE  report.  He
    considered the evidence of the appellant and his brother as well as the
    psychiatric report of Dr Shaffiullha. The appellant  expressed  remorse
    for what he had done and promised that he would not commit any  further
    offences. Having considered the evidence relating to rehabilitation the
    judge concluded that the appellant had rebutted the presumption that he
    is a danger to the community for the  purpose  of  section  72(6)  NIAA
    2002.


25. The judge considered whether refugee status had ceased for the  purpose
    of  Article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee  Convention.  He  considered   the
    background evidence relating to Burundi  and  accepted  that  political
    opponents were at risk. He accepted that this appeared to lend  support
    to the respondent's assertion that the appellant would not be  at  risk
    on return because he is not politically active.

26. However, the judge went on to consider the evidence outlined  by  UNHCR
    in its recommendation. The evidence included a Financial Times  article
    dated 09 November 2017, which reported that the International  Criminal
    Court had authorised  an  investigation  into  alleged  state-sponsored
    crimes against humanity  in  Burundi  committed  since  2015  when  the
    President announced that he would stay in power beyond his term  limit.
    The report added that some 413,490 people had  been  displaced  between
    April 2015 and May 2017. The judge also took into account a report from
    the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada which stated that  some  of
    the victims of human rights  violations  during  search  operations  in
    December 2016 'were targeted because they were Tutsis'. Another witness
    claimed  that  Tutsis   were   systematically   killed   in   Nyakabiga
    neighbourhood in Bujumbura  whilst  Hutus  were  spared.  In  Muramviya
    neighbourhood the decision to arrest people was also reportedly made on
    an ethnic basis, with most Hutus being released. The judge went  on  to
    consider a report from the Economist dated 23 April 2016, which  stated
    that '[the President's] youth militia terrorises his opponents, many of
    whom are Tutsis. Hundreds, perhaps thousands,  of  people,  most  young
    men, have been "disappeared". Torture is rife ... Tutsis have cause  to
    be afraid. They are quietly being purged from the Army. On  the  radio,
    they hear murderous rhetoric of the  sort  that  preceded  the  Rwandan
    genocide.' The judge  noted  that  UNHCR  concluded  that  the  country
    information did not demonstrate that there was a  significant,  durable
    or non-temporary change in circumstances for the  purpose  of  applying
    Article 1C(5).


27. The judge noted the respondent's response to the recommendation made by
    UNHCR in the decision letter. He bemoaned the fact that  neither  party
    produced any recent background evidence to assist him.  He  found  that
    parts of the Home Office Response to an information  request  'Burundi:
    Religion; ethnicity' (04/17-065) dated 28  April  2017  undermined  her
    position. For example, a reference to the Federation  of  Human  Rights
    League 2016 report stated that 'Tutsi populations are thus perceived as
    being opposed "by nature" to the power in place and are persecuted  for
    this reason'. Having assessed the background evidence relating  to  the
    situation in Burundi the judge concluded that the respondent failed  to
    show that there had been  a  fundamental  and  durable  change  in  the
    circumstances  for  the  purpose  of  Article  1C(5)  of  the   Refugee
    Convention. The judge went on to make a further positive finding to say
    that he was satisfied that the appellant  continued  to  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in Burundi for reasons of his ethnic  group
    or membership of a  particular  social  group.  It  followed  that  the
    appellant was also at risk of ill-treatment contrary to  Article  3  of
    the European Convention.

Upper Tribunal decision

28. The respondent was granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    In a decision promulgated on 13 January 2020 an  Upper  Tribunal  judge
    found that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of  an
    error on a point of law and set it aside.


29. The Upper Tribunal summarised  the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge. The respondent's grounds  of  appeal  focussed  on  the
    findings relating to section 72 and expressed general disagreement with
    outcome relating to risk on return. The Upper Tribunal judge  made  the
    following findings:

          "17.   ... The judge has failed to factor into his assessment the
                 very particular  assessment  needed  of  the  violence  and
                 sentence passed. A finding that a presumption under s72 has
                 been rebutted must not  only  make  findings  of  fact  and
                 delineate the evidence relied upon and  the  weight  to  be
                 given to that evidence but there must be an acknowledgement
                 of the seriousness of the criminality in that context;  the
                 greater the criminality the  greater  weight  must  be  the
                 evidence that leads to a finding the presumption  has  been
                 rebutted.


          18.    The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in finding that
                 [the appellant] rebutted the presumption under s72.


          19.    The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the  decision  by
                 the Secretary of State to revoke [the appellant's]  refugee
                 status in the context of his protection claim. He  set  out
                 the test to be considered namely, briefly, that the  burden
                 lay upon the Secretary of State in proving there  had  been
                 durable change in the circumstances in Burundi;  the  judge
                 found that the burden had not been discharged.


          20.    That the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in  finding  that
                 [the  appellant]  had  rebutted   the   presumption   leads
                 inexorably to a finding that the decision by the judge that
                 the Secretary of State had not  proved  there  had  been  a
                 durable change in circumstances such  that  refugee  status
                 could be revoked was infected by an error of law and is set
                 aside accordingly.


          21.    The judge in paragraph 35 relies upon the same findings of
                 fact to find  that  even  if  his  findings  regarding  the
                 rebuttal of the s72 presumption are incorrect,  deportation
                 would be contrary to Article 3. This is a fundamental error
                 of law. The burden of proof in an Article 3 case is not the
                 same as that involving  a  case  where  there  has  been  a
                 revocation of refugee status. The judge has failed to apply
                 the correct burden of  proof  and  his  finding  that  [the
                 appellant] would be at risk of an Article 3 breach is based
                 on a fundamental error."

30. We make the following observations about the Upper Tribunal's findings.




31. First, the Upper  Tribunal  judge  did  not  appear  to  give  material
    consideration to the positive finding made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at [35] that the appellant continued to have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution at the date of the hearing. This was  consistent  with  the
    'mirror image' approach emphasised by the Court of Appeal in SSHD v  MA
    (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994; [2018] Imm AR 1273. The  Upper  Tribunal
    was correct to note that the burden falls on  the  respondent  to  show
    that refugee status has ceased. However, the error of law decision  did
    not identify any  specific  errors  of  approach  in  the  fact-finding
    exercise conducted by the First-tier Tribunal with  reference  to  more
    recent background evidence. Nor were the conclusions relating  to  risk
    on return found to be outside a range of reasonable responses  to  that
    evidence.

32. Second, section 72 is  said  to  reflect  a  proper  interpretation  of
    Article 33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  which  outlines  specific
    circumstances in which it is permissible to remove a refugee.  Although
    section 72 inaccurately describes Article  33(2)  as  'exclusion'  from
    refugee status,  in  fact,  it  is  an  exception  to  the  fundamental
    principle of non-refoulement. Section 72 relates  to  the  question  of
    whether a refugee poses a danger to the host community for the  purpose
    of Article 33(2). This is separate to the question of whether a  person
    has a well-founded fear of  persecution  under  Article  1A(2)  of  the
    Refugee Convention if returned to their country of  origin.  For  these
    reasons, we do not agree that it 'inexorably' followed that an error in
    a finding relating to the assessment of whether a person poses a danger
    to the community for the purpose of section 72 must  'infect'  findings
    relating to risk on return for the  purpose  of  Article  1A(2),  which
    focussed on a different legal question.

33. Third, despite those observations, if the Upper Tribunal found that the
    decision involved an error of law in the assessment of section  72,  it
    was obliged to set aside the overall conclusion that the appeal  should
    be allowed on Refugee Convention grounds given that  section  72(10)(b)
    dictates the outcome of the appeal on that ground if a person fails  to
    rebut the presumption that they are a danger to the community. In  view
    of the fact that the Upper Tribunal did not find any express errors  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's factual findings, in our assessment, it  does
    not necessarily follow that they were unsafe.

The hearing

34. The case was not deemed suitable for a remote hearing  and  was  listed
    for a face-to-face hearing with appropriate social distancing  measures
    in place due to the continued need to prevent the spread of  Covid  19.
    The appellant and his mother gave evidence. The details of the evidence
    and submissions are a matter of record.

Decision and reasons

35. Section 72(10)(a) NIAA 2002 states that a court or tribunal 'must begin
    substantive deliberation on the appeal by considering the certificate'.
    Following the cases of SSHD v JS (Uganda) [2020] 1 WLR 43;  [2020]  Imm
    AR 258 (consideration of whether a dependent child was recognised as  a
    refugee) and Essa (Revocation of protection status appeals) [2018] UKUT
    244 (consideration of cessation even if a  section  72  certificate  is
    upheld), in a case such as this, a court or tribunal may also  need  to
    make findings on whether the person was recognised as, and still is,  a
    refugee whether or not it agrees with the section 72 certificate.


36. The  logical  order  to  consider  these  issues  for  the  purpose  of
    international  law  would  be  to  determine  whether  a  person  is  a
    recognised refugee before deciding whether that status has ceased.  The
    exception to the principle of non-refoulement only applies to a  person
    who is a refugee, so it makes sense to determine the issue  of  refugee
    status first before turning to the question  of  whether  expulsion  is
    justified because a  refugee  has  been  convicted  of  a  particularly
    serious crime and constitutes a danger to the community.  We  recognise
    that under UK law a procedure is outlined  in  section  72(10)(a)  NIAA
    2002, but we cannot see that anything turns on taking the issues  in  a
    more logical order as long all relevant issues are determined, and  the
    appropriate statutory outcome is applied.


Refugee Convention - recognition as a refugee (JS(Uganda))

37. Whether a person was recognised as a refugee will depend on  the  facts
    and circumstances of each case. The appellant entered the UK  with  his
    mother when he was 11 years old. The details of his mother's claim, and
    the nature of the conflict in Burundi at the time,  showed  a  risk  of
    ethnic violence that was not all that specific to her. She expressed  a
    fear that her children would also be subject to persecution because  of
    their mixed  Tutsi/Hutu  heritage.  A  copy  of  his  mother's  initial
    recognition of refugee status names the children as  dependents.  There
    is evidence to show that the appellant was issued  with  a  UK  Refugee
    Convention travel document.


38.  When  the  respondent  began  deportation  proceedings  there  was  no
    suggestion that the appellant was not  recognised  as  a  refugee.  The
    respondent went through the formal process  of  consulting  with  UNHCR
    regarding cessation before deciding that his  status  had  ceased.  The
    respondent could not decide that status had  ceased  without  accepting
    that the person was a recognised refugee whose status could  cease.  We
    recognise that the decision in JS (Uganda) post-dates the  decision  to
    refuse the protection and human rights claim  in  this  case,  but  the
    wording of the decision letter indicates that it was accepted  that  he
    was a recognised refugee. The  respondent  considered  whether  it  was
    appropriate to 'revoke... refugee  status'  and  referred  to  inviting
    representations on his 'continuing entitlement to refugee status'.  The
    respondent concluded that 'subsequent to obtaining refugee status,  you
    can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with  which  you
    have been recognised as a refugee have ceased  to  exist,  continue  to
    refuse  to  avail  yourself  of  the  protection  of  the  country   of
    nationality'.

39. Although Ms Isherwood provided a  copy  of  JS  (Uganda),  among  other
    authorities, no clear submissions were made on  the  issue  of  initial
    recognition of refugee status beyond stating that he was recognised  as
    a dependent on his mother's claim. She mentioned the decision in SSHD v
    KN (DRC) [2019] EWCA Civ 1665 but did not explain how or why she relied
    on it. The focus of her submissions was on whether there was a  current
    risk on return.

40. We conclude that the  respondent  has  not  explicitly  questioned  the
    initial recognition of refugee status. In any event, we  are  satisfied
    that the nature and extent of the violence in Burundi at  the  relevant
    time shows that this is one of those cases, as recognised by the  Court
    of Appeal in JS (Uganda), where the whole family was likely  to  be  at
    risk.  For these reasons, we find that  the  grant  of  status  to  the
    appellant's mother with her dependents also recognised the children  as
    refugees. The appellant was recognised as a refugee at a time preceding
    the transposition of the Qualification Directive (EC/83/EC) into UK law
    and was a refugee with 'Convention status': see Dang (Refugee  -  query
    revocation - Article 3) [2013] UKUT 43 (IAC).

Refugee Convention - cessation (Essa)

41. A person is a refugee as soon as they meet the definition contained  in
    Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention. A grant of leave to remain  as
    a refugee is a declaratory act recognising  that  status.  The  Refugee
    Convention contains  no  principle  of  'revocation'  of  status.  Once
    recognised, refugee status only comes to an end  in  the  circumstances
    set out in Article 1C, known as the cessation  clauses.  The  cessation
    clauses only apply to a person who has been formally  recognised  as  a
    refugee by the host state: see R v Special Adjudicator (Respondent)  ex
    parte Hoxha [2005] 1 WLR 1063. In the same circumstances, a person  who
    has not been formally recognised as a refugee simply  no  longer  meets
    the requirements of Article 1A(2). In the case  of  a  person  who  was
    granted leave to remain as a refugee prior to the transposition of  the
    Qualification  Directive  the  term  'revocation'  can  only  have  the
    ordinary meaning under UK law i.e. cancellation of leave to remain.


42. 'Once an asylum application has been formally  determined  and  refugee
    status officially  granted,  with  all  the  benefits  both  under  the
    Convention and under national law  which  that  carries  with  it,  the
    refugee has the assurance of a secure future in the host country and  a
    legitimate expectation that he will not henceforth be stripped of  this
    save  for  demonstrably  good  and  sufficient   reason.'   With   this
    observation the House of Lords in Hoxha explained why there must  be  a
    'strict' and 'restrictive' approach to the application of the cessation
    clauses.

43. The relevant clause for the purpose of this appeal  is  Article  1C(5).
    Refugee status will cease when a person  can  no  longer,  because  the
    circumstances in connection with which he  has  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to  avail  himself  of
    the protection of the country of his nationality. The burden  of  proof
    is on the respondent to show  that  the  cessation  clause  applies.  A
    cessation decision is the 'mirror  image'  of  a  decision  determining
    refugee status. The grounds for cessation do not  go  beyond  verifying
    whether the grounds for  recognition  of  refugee  status  continue  to
    exist: see SSHD v MA (Somalia) [2018] Imm AR 1273; [2018] EWCA Civ 994.




44. We have considered  whether  the  evidence  shows  that  the  appellant
    continues to have a well-founded fear of persecution in Burundi  taking
    into account the general political conditions there and his  individual
    circumstances. Although the Court of Appeal has  encouraged  a  'mirror
    image' approach to the cessation clause, that assessment must still  be
    approached within the correct legal context. The cessation clauses must
    be applied in a 'strict' and 'restrictive' way. The burden  is  on  the
    respondent to show that there has been a fundamental and durable change
    in circumstances such that the circumstances in connection  with  which
    the appellant was recognised as a refugee no longer exist.

45. Even if we are wrong in our observations about the extent of the  Upper
    Tribunal's findings  relating  to  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings of fact, having considered  the  most  up  to  date
    evidence relating to the situation in Burundi, we have come to the same
    conclusion as the First-tier Tribunal in relation to risk on return.

46. The background evidence before the Upper Tribunal relating  to  Burundi
    is limited but contains reliable sources of  information  from  the  US
    State Department Reports for 2019 and 2020. The evidence also  includes
    detailed articles from the Africa Center for Strategic Studies dated 24
    September 2019 and 22 June 2020. We were also provided with a  copy  of
    the same Home Office response to an information request (RIR) dated  28
    April 2017 on 'Burundi:  Religion;  ethnicity'  (04/17-065)  which  was
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

47. We pick up the story of political events in Burundi from 2003 (see [3]-
    [5] above). In April 2003 Domitien Ndayizeye, a Hutu, succeeded  Pierre
    Buyoya, a Tutsi, as President under the  terms  of  the  power  sharing
    agreement. The evidence shows that by July 2003 there was a major rebel
    assault on Bujumbura causing thousands to flee their  homes,  including
    the appellant and his family. In November 2003 the fighting came to  an
    end after President Ndayizeye signed an agreement with the  Forces  for
    Defence  of  Democracy  (FDD),  a  Hutu  rebel  group  led  by   Pierre
    Nkurunziza. In 2004  UN  forces  took  over  peacekeeping  duties  from
    African  Union  troops.  In  June  2005   Pierre   Nkurunziza   won   a
    parliamentary election and was elected President. The government signed
    a ceasefire agreement with the last remaining rebel group,  the  Forces
    for National Liberation (FNL) in 2006  although  it  is  reported  that
    there were still sporadic clashes over the next two years.

48. Although the elections ushered in a period of relative  stability,  the
    evidence  shows  that  the  government  of  Pierre  Nkurunziza   became
    increasingly authoritarian. By 2015 Nkurunziza sought to extend the two-
    term constitutional restriction on his Presidency.  Any  resistance  to
    this act was seen as opposition. It was increasingly met with  violence
    and repression by his supporters, including the notorious  Imbonerakure
    youth militia, which acts with near total impunity. The  Africa  Center
    article dated 24 September 2019 states that  Nkurunziza's  decision  to
    pursue  a  third  term  coupled  with  the  resurfacing  of  the   Hutu
    nationalist agenda of the ruling CNDD-FDD  party  triggered  months  of
    protests and a failed coup attempt in May 2015. The article goes on  to
    say that 'It also set off a wave of defections and tit for tat violence
    in the military, targeted killings of civilians  -  often  with  ethnic
    undertones - and the launching of armed rebellions  by  three  separate
    movements.' The article suggests that around 1,700 people  were  killed
    since  2015  although  the  Final  Report   of   the   UN   Independent
    Investigation on Burundi dated September 2017 cautioned  that  'no  one
    can quantify exactly all the  violations  that  have  taken  place  and
    continue to take place in a  situation  as  closed  and  repressive  as
    Burundi.'


49. The Africa Center article suggests that 400,000 refugees may have  been
    created by the crisis (out of a population of 10  million).  Atrocities
    by state agents are not confined within Burundi's borders. The  article
    states that in 2018 the International Refugee Rights Initiative  (IRRI)
    documented attacks, killings and disappearances of  Burundian  refugees
    at Uganda's Nakivale refugee camp. Refugees that  IRRI  spoke  to  said
    that they recognised Burundian  intelligence  agents  and  Imbonerakure
    members including some who had killed family members  in  Burundi.  The
    USSD report also  says  that  there  were  credible  reports  that  the
    government attempted to use international  law  enforcement  tools  for
    politically motivated reprisals against  specific  individuals  located
    outside the country.  Human  Rights  Watch  reported  that  authorities
    collaborated with Tanzanian  officials  to  arrest,  torture,  forcibly
    repatriate, and detain  without  charge  refugees  and  asylum  seekers
    residing in Tanzania.

50. The new constitution passed in May 2018 is reported to have  dismantled
    two thirds of the  provisions  of  the  Arusha  Accords  including  the
    carefully crafted power sharing structure. The  Africa  Center  article
    reported that as the CNDD-FDD was gearing up for planned  elections  in
    2020 'intimidation, disappearance, killings and ethnic rhetoric are all
    on the rise.'

51. The US State Department Report for 2020 reported that the elections  in
    May 2020 resulted were 'deeply flawed' with widespread reports of human
    rights abuses mostly perpetrated  against  the  main  opposition  party
    members. Numerous irregularities  undermined  the  credibility  of  the
    process in which international observers did not participate. Two weeks
    after the election Pierre Nkurunziza died and was succeeded by Evariste
    Ndayishimiye. The USSD report states stated that  a  UN  mission  noted
    that the government took steps to fight impunity  in  July  and  August
    2020 to arrest and prosecute members of the ruling CNDD-FDD party youth
    league, senior police officers and local administrative  officials  for
    extortion and other criminal offences, but reported that the prevailing
    view was that more change was needed. The Africa Center  article  dated
    22 June 2020 is less optimistic, providing an overview of rivalries and
    shifting power dynamics within the ruling party which may give power to
    even more hard-line Hutu  nationalists  with  the  government  and  the
    military.

52. The USSD continued to report significant human rights abuses in Burundi
    during 2020. In September 2020 the UN Commission of Inquiry on  Burundi
    (COI) issued a report. The members of the Commission were denied access
    to the country but conducted face to face  or  remote  interviews  with
    more than 300 victims, witnesses and other sources in the  country  and
    in exile. It reported that bodies bearing signs of  violence  continued
    to be found in public places, but despite this, the authorities made no
    attempt to investigate their deaths.  The  COI  report  concluded  that
    human rights  violations  were  mainly  committed  by  members  of  the
    Imbonerakure and local administrative officials acting alone or jointly
    with police or the National Intelligence Service. The USSD report  went
    on to state that victims were generally perceived as opponents  of  the
    government or the  ruling  party.  Some  media  outlets  reported  that
    Burundian nationals who returned to the  country  after  having  sought
    refuge abroad were also targeted, as were young  men  following  travel
    abroad who were accused of belonging to or supporting armed  opposition
    groups. As in previous years, the COID report  stated  that  there  was
    reason to believe that abuses committed by  the  Burundian  authorities
    constituted crimes against humanity.


53. The COI report went on to say that some  victims  associated  with  the
    opposition or even  without  political  affiliation  disappeared  after
    refusing to join the ruling political party or  the  Imbonerakure.  The
    NGOs  Ligue  Iteka  and  SOS   Torture   Burundi   regularly   reported
    disappearances, which were sometimes later determined  to  be  killings
    when bodies were discovered. As of mid-September Ligue Iteka documented
    30 disappearances but lack of access to reliable reporting,  caused  in
    part by restraints of civil  society,  limited  the  ability  of  human
    rights organisations to gather complete data. Despite some instances of
    arrests, impunity remained a problem.

54. The USSD report goes on to  say  that  no  verifiable  statistics  were
    available on the number of political prisoners or detainees  but  human
    rights groups estimate that it could range from a  few  hundred  to  as
    many as 4,000 people. The government denied  incarcerating  people  for
    political  reasons,  citing  instead  acts  against   state   security,
    participation in rebellion,  or  inciting  insurrection.  Human  rights
    groups stated that these charges were often a  pretext  for  repressing
    members of political opposition parties  and  human  rights  defenders.
    There were regular arrests of member of the opposition  throughout  the
    year, but others, mainly young men, were  arrested  or  detained  under
    suspicion of having cooperated with armed rebel groups.

55. The USSD  report  states  that  the  government  enforced  the  use  of
    household logbooks in some neighbourhoods in the capital.  In  numerous
    instances, police arrested people during neighbourhood searches for not
    being  registered  in  household  booklets.  Police,  SNR  agents,  and
    Imbonerakure members sometimes acting as mixed security committees  set
    up roadblocks and conducted general vehicle inspections  and  searches.
    While members of the security forces  sought  bribes,  security  agents
    were also reported to seize weapons and household  items  they  claimed
    could be used to support an insurgency.

56. Ms Isherwood produced a copy of the Home Office RIR dated 28 April 2017
    to assist the Upper Tribunal. We agree  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge that this document serves to emphasise that, whilst the political
    situation is more focussed on the repression  of  political  opponents,
    there is still an ethnic dimension to the situation albeit  at  a  less
    obvious level to the targeted killings of the 1990s. The RIR refers  to
    various different source materials. A report from the  Immigration  and
    Refugee Board Canada emphasised that the government targeted anyone who
    opposes it, both  Hutu  and  Tutsi.  However,  in  a  2016  report  the
    International Federation of Human Rights League stated that, 'while the
    ethnic factor is not always the primary motivation for crimes committed
    by the Burundian security force, it tends to become an  "indicator"  of
    the violence exercised by the Burundian authorities against those  they
    suspect of being opposed to the President's third term. The same source
    states that "Tutsi populations are thus perceived as being opposed  'by
    nature' to the power in place and are persecuted for this  reason"'  An
    academic whose area of interest  included  ethnicity  and  violence  in
    Burundi stated: 'Burundi's ongoing political crisis  has  not  occurred
    primarily on ethnic lines. Nonetheless, in some places in  the  country
    violence has taken on explicitly ethnic dimensions. In  most  instances
    of ethnically-charged violence, this violence has targeted Tutsis'


57. The RIR sets out another quote from the same  Immigration  and  Refugee
    Board report, which cited information from a  legal  research  internet
    site called Jurist led by  a  law  professor  from  the  University  of
    Pittsburgh, which outlined academic commentary on  'genocide  rhetoric'
    in Burundi. According to that commentary,  demonstrations  against  the
    third term were contained by 'fierce reprisals [by  police]'  in  Tutsi
    dominated suburbs.  It  goes  on  to  say  that  'according  to  L�once
    Ngendakumana, one of the Hutu signatories to the Arusha Peace Agreement
    and President of the Frodebu-Sawanya opposition party,  the  Nkurunziza
    regime... "commits violent attacks on Tutsi  neighbourhoods  and  young
    Tutsis who, when arrested, are quickly killed, while  young  Hutus  are
    generally arrested for 'reform.'"'

58. The RIR goes  on  to  cite  a  State  of  the  World's  Minorities  and
    Indigenous Peoples report for 2016 which stated that many of the people
    killed in the violence in 2015 were reported to  be  unarmed  civilians
    from primarily opposition  supporting  Tutsi  neighbourhoods  who  were
    killed after being taken into custody during house-to-house searches by
    security forces. By the beginning  of  2016  at  least  two  new  armed
    opposition groups reportedly formed with  the  stated  aim  of  ousting
    Pierre Nkurunziza. The RIR referred to an article published by  African
    argument in 2017 reporting that security forces  and  the  Imbonerakure
    have increasingly targeted the Tutsis since December  2015.  Similarly,
    the FIDH and the Ligue Iteka state that  many  victims  reported  being
    arrested  and/or  tortured  after  being  identified  as  Tutsi.  Other
    reports, including one  by  Human  Rights  Watch,  were  consistent  in
    stating that there was evidence to show that Tutsis  were  targeted  as
    suspected opponents.

59. The respondent's position is that the appellant is no  longer  at  risk
    because the evidence shows that only political opponents  are  targeted
    by the government and the appellant has no political profile.  Although
    the background evidence is broadly consistent with this  assertion,  in
    our assessment the respondent's decision  letter  over  simplifies  the
    situation. The recent history of Burundi has been rife with significant
    levels of ethnic violence. The evidence shows that the ethnic  violence
    of the 1990s gave way to an authoritarian Hutu nationalist regime.  The
    efforts forged in the Arusha Accords to provide balanced power  sharing
    between the various groups were eroded along with other basic  elements
    of the constitution, leading to  a  significant  deterioration  in  the
    political situation  in  2015.  Whilst  the  evidence  shows  that  the
    violence and oppression unleashed on perceived opponents since 2015  is
    not primarily motivated by ethnic identity, the  evidence  makes  clear
    that long standing ethnic  tensions  remain  a  significant  factor  in
    Burundian politics.

60. The death of Pierre Nkurunziza in 2020 ended an era, but  it  is  clear
    that his successor, President Ndayishimiye is  a  member  of  the  same
    ruling CNDD-FDD party. Although there are reports of some  prosecutions
    of officials and members of the notorious  Imbonerakure,  overall,  the
    evidence continues to show significant abuses and widespread  impunity.
    This evidence might also need to  be  placed  in  the  context  of  the
    reports of power struggles within the CNDD-FD and the army. Given  that
    the government in power is  Hutu  dominated  the  evidence  shows  that
    Tutsis are more likely to be perceived as opponents. Young men are more
    likely to be perceived as potential rebel fighters. Those who have been
    refugees outside the country and who return from abroad are  likely  to
    be viewed with suspicion. Household registration and household searches
    by the authorities are likely to highlight  a  person's  ethnicity  and
    whether they have recently returned from abroad.


61. The appellant produced a letter from Mr Muhamoud Ndikumana, who it  the
    Chairman of  the  Friends  of  Burundi  Association  (FoBA),  which  he
    describes as a  relief  and  development  charity.  He  says  that  the
    organisation is formed of people of Burundian descent 'whom we can  say
    are better placed to know  how  things  work'.  He  confirms  what  the
    appellant's mother told us in evidence, that people of mixed  ethnicity
    are not trusted by either ethnic group because  they  cannot  ascertain
    where their loyalties might lie. It is therefore 'safer (for  them)  to
    be eliminated'. While we accept that someone from Burundi may  be  able
    to express an opinion as to how people of mixed ethnicity  are  usually
    viewed, we cannot see that Mr Ndikumana is any  better  qualified  than
    the appellant's mother to comment. In  so  far  as  their  evidence  is
    logical when placed in the historical context  of  ethnic  violence  in
    Burundi we take it into account.

62. The respondent's decision letter accepts that a child normally inherits
    its father's ethnicity. However, there is  no  evidence  before  us  to
    support the assertion that 'a child of mixed ethnicity can also  choose
    to be a part of his mother's ethnic group as long as  its  members  are
    accepting.' Although the decision letter references another RIR  report
    from 2017, that document was not directly quoted in the decision letter
    and a copy has not been provided for us to  ascertain  the  source,  if
    there is one, of  the  assertion  that  a  person  can  'choose'  their
    ethnicity. It is trite that the perception of the potential  persecutor
    is key: see Sivakumar v SSHD [2003] INLR 457. It matters less  how  the
    appellant might identify his ethnicity and more how others  are  likely
    to perceive him.

63. We have also taken into account the fact that his mother told  us  that
    she has returned to  Burundi  on  three  occasions  to  visit  friends.
    However, we do not consider this indicates that the appellant would  no
    longer be at risk on return. The appellant's mother returned for  short
    periods of time, would be identified as a Hutu, and is of  a  different
    gender and age demographic to the appellant.

64. The evidence before us shows that the appellant is more  likely  to  be
    perceived as a Tutsi due to his father's ethnicity. He says that he has
    been bullied in the past because of his lighter skin colour. We  prefer
    the more logical explanation provided by the appellant's mother and  Mr
    Ndikumana, that people of mixed ethnicity are also more  likely  to  be
    viewed with suspicion. People of both ethnicities have good  reason  to
    be cautious in light of Burundi's tragic history  of  ethnic  violence.
    The evidence before us shows that young men are more likely to be  seen
    as a potential threat. Refugees returning from  abroad  are  also  more
    likely to be viewed with suspicion. The family does not appear to  have
    any significant remaining connections  in  Burundi  either  by  way  of
    property or close family members. The appellants mother  told  us  that
    she stayed with a  friend  when  she  visited  for  a  few  weeks.  The
    appellant left Burundi at a young age and has  no  knowledge  of  adult
    life there. He has no obvious household to register with and is  likely
    to be viewed with suspicion on return.

65. The evidence shows that as a young man returning  from  abroad  who  is
    likely to be identified as a Tutsi, the  appellant's  profile  is  such
    that there is a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  he  would  be
    perceived as a potential  political  opponent.  For  these  reasons  we
    conclude that the evidence continues to show that the appellant  has  a
    well-founded fear of persecution for reasons  of  attributed  political
    opinion and/or for reasons of his ethnicity.

66. The situation in Burundi has changed in focus to  some  extent,  moving
    from overt ethnic violence towards political repression.  However,  the
    evidence shows that the ethnic tensions that fuelled  the  violence  in
    the early 1990s still play a significant role  in  Burundian  political
    and social life. Significant abuses are still carried out, largely with
    impunity, by the Hutu dominated authorities and militia  groups  acting
    on their behalf. The reliability of the recent  elections  were  called
    into question. The death of President Nkurunziza changed the  situation
    to some extent, but his successor  comes  from  the  same  ruling  Hutu
    nationalist party and it is too soon to tell whether there is any cause
    for optimism. In light of the evidence which continues to show  a  very
    serious and concerning human rights situation in Burundi,  we  conclude
    that  the  respondent  has  failed  to  show  that  there  has  been  a
    fundamental and durable change  in  the  circumstances  such  that  the
    circumstances in connection with which he was recognised as  a  refugee
    have ceased to exist for the purpose of Article 1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.

Refugee Convention - Article 33(2) (section 72)

67. A core principle of the Refugee Convention is that no contracting state
    shall expel or return (refoule) a refugee in any manner  whatsoever  to
    the frontiers of  territories  where  his  life  or  freedom  would  be
    threatened  (Article  33(1)).  The  exception  to  the  prohibition  of
    refoulement is when there are  reasonable  grounds  for  regarding  the
    refugee as a danger to the security of the country in which  they  are,
    or who, having been convicted by a final  judgment  of  a  particularly
    serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community  of  that  country
    (Article 33(2)). A person who has been  recognised  as  a  refugee  can
    lawfully be expelled or removed from the host state  without  breaching
    obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention.  Status  recognised  with
    reference to the Refugee Convention ('Convention status') does not come
    to an end or cease upon the application of Article 33(2).


68. Section 72 of the NIAA 2002 is said to reflect the provisions contained
    in Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention  although  it  inaccurately
    describes the effect of  the  provision  as  'exclusion'  from  Refugee
    Status  rather  than  framing  the  provision  in  terms  of  permitted
    refoulement. In EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  630  the  Court  of
    Appeal emphasised that section 72 must be read to comply  with  Article
    33(2) of the Refugee Convention. It is important to note  that  section
    72 came into force before the Qualification Directive and is  expressly
    intended to reflect the provisions of  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention and not Article 14(4) of the Directive.

69. On behalf of the appellant it is not disputed that he has  committed  a
    particularly serious crime. The issue for determination in this  appeal
    is whether, at the date of the hearing, the appellant has rebutted  the
    presumption that he is a danger to the community  for  the  purpose  of
    section 76(6).

70. We have had the benefit of hearing evidence from the appellant and  his
    mother. We have also set out the evidence contained in the partial copy
    of the RESOLVE report. We place greater weight on the OASys  assessment
    because we only have a partial copy of the RESOLVE  report,  the  OASys
    assessment is the main risk assessment tool, the OASys assessment  took
    into account the RESOLVE course, and is the more recent assessment.

71. We find that the appellant's evidence at  the  hearing  was  consistent
    with the observations made  by  the  officer  who  prepared  the  OASys
    assessment. The appellant accepts responsibility for his  part  in  the
    offence. He said that 'crime is no longer in me'. He said that  he  had
    completely changed and no longer wanted to think about doing crime.  He
    had been looking into doing a course on  public  speaking  so  that  he
    could become a Toast  Master.  He  was  looking  into  online  business
    studies courses. When asked what he would do with such a  qualification
    he said that he was thinking of a wholesale business or selling  things
    on line. The appellant told us that he was at an  age  where  he  might
    want to start a family. He wanted to pursue a  peaceful  life  and  not
    have to worry about the consequences of what he had done. When  talking
    about the RESOLVE course he said that the programme helped a person  to
    evaluate themself and what to do if you had thoughts of doing something
    criminal. He said it was 'about assessing  whether  it  was  worth  the
    risk'.

72. It seems likely that a long period in prison has  given  the  appellant
    time to think about the consequence of  his  actions,  to  engage  with
    available rehabilitation, and simply to mature. In  our  assessment  he
    may have made some progress towards  rehabilitation  but  it  is  still
    early days since his release. We are concerned that his  expression  of
    responsibility for the offence, whilst  no  doubt  sincerely  held,  is
    still fairly superficial. The reasons why he said  that  he  would  not
    commit crime were focussed far more on the  potential  negative  impact
    that further offending might have on  his  own  life  rather  than  any
    meaningful acknowledgment of the impact it  might  have  on  others.  A
    deeper understanding of the impact on his victim and how he might still
    pose a risk to other potential victims would have  indicated  progress,
    but that was lacking from his evidence.

73. The OASys report highlighted financial motivations for the crime  as  a
    result of the financial difficulties that the appellant fell into  with
    an earlier attempt at running an online business. The OASys showed that
    he had ever changing plans for how he might earn a  living,  which  had
    changed again by the time of the hearing. The appellant  still  has  no
    willingness to take paid employment and only intends to earn  a  living
    through business and self-employment. This risks  placing  him  in  the
    same situation that led to the index offence. The  appellant  does  not
    appear to have any insight into how or why his  vague  and  peripatetic
    plans to earn a living might increase the risk of him reoffending.

74. It is unsurprising that the appellant was  assessed  as  high  risk  of
    causing serious harm because of the very serious nature  of  the  index
    offence. The risk of reoffending in relation to violent and non-violent
    offences is assessed to be 'medium'. This assessment was done recently.
    At the date of the hearing the appellant  had  only  been  released  on
    licence for a few weeks and was  still  living  in  approved  premises.
    Although we accept that he has made some progress  with  rehabilitation
    since his conviction,  the  appellant  is  subject  to  strict  licence
    conditions and supervision. It is too soon to tell whether he  is  able
    to make further progress in reducing the risk that he  poses  while  he
    serves the next half of his sentence in the community.

75. We highlight one other concern about the risk of  reoffending  that  we
    think would be wise for the appellant to discuss with  his  supervising
    officer if he is serious about reducing  the  risk  that  he  currently
    poses. It is of some concern that the assessor who completed the  OASys
    report did not pick  up  on  the  obvious  cause  of  PTSD,  which  was
    mentioned in the RESOLVE  report.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  was
    exposed to extreme violence as a child is likely to be relevant to  his
    own use of such serious violence. Dr  Shaffiullha  is  not  a  forensic
    psychologist but is well qualified to comment on the overall effect  of
    severe childhood trauma. His report highlighted that  childhood  trauma
    can greatly disrupt interpersonal relationships and a person's  ability
    effectively to manage emotions. Consequently, when anger occurs, people
    with a history of childhood trauma may not know how  to  control  those
    emotions,  resulting  in  strong   anger   impulses   and   destructive
    behaviours. However, Dr Shaffiullha made clear that he  did  not  think
    that 'the appellant's ability to understand the nature of  his  conduct
    to form a rational judgement  or  exercise  control  was  substantially
    impaired by any mental health condition.'


76. Having highlighted this  issue  we  are  concerned  that  the  evidence
    indicates that the appellant has not received professional treatment to
    tackle the effects of childhood trauma and appears to have resorted  to
    reading books on the issue. Whilst we recognise that the appellant  was
    reluctant to discuss his history of childhood trauma with  the  officer
    who prepared the OASys assessment, it is an issue that he may  need  to
    face in order to progress with his rehabilitation. He can only do  this
    with professional assistance. His supervising officer or GP may be able
    to arrange a referral.

77. We take into account the very serious nature of  the  offence  and  the
    fact that the appellant is said  to  still  pose  a  'medium'  risk  of
    reoffending. Whilst one  might  expect  that  he  may  have  made  some
    progress after so many years in prison, the evidence suggests that  the
    appellant has not yet tackled some  of  the  risk  factors  that  might
    reduce the risk he poses to the public.

78. For these reasons we are not satisfied that the appellant has  rebutted
    the presumption that he is a danger to the community for the purpose of
    section 72(6) NIAA 2002. Section 72(10)(b) requires a court or tribunal
    to dismiss an appeal brought on the ground that the decision to  revoke
    protection status breaches the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the
    Refugee Convention.

79. As the Upper Tribunal in Essa highlighted, it is  difficult  to  square
    the wording of section 82(3)(a) NIAA 2002 when there is no principle of
    'revocation' under the Refugee Convention, which is why it is necessary
    to still make findings relating to cessation even  if  the  section  72
    certificate is upheld.  We  have  made  a  positive  finding  that  the
    appellant continues to have a well-founded fear of  persecution  for  a
    convention reason if returned to Burundi.  He  continues  to  meet  the
    requirement of Article 1A(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  but  is  a
    removable refugee. However, by operation of statute the appeal  brought
    on the Refugee Convention grounds must be dismissed.

European Convention - Article 3

80. We are fully aware of the fact that the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    respondent to show that the cessation clause  applies,  and  that  when
    considering Article 3, the burden of proof is on the appellant to  show
    that there is a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment. However, we  have
    made a positive finding that the evidence shows on the low standard  of
    proof that the appellant continues  to  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution if removed to Burundi. For the same reasons given above, we
    conclude that he is also at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.

DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR)



Signed   M. Canavan          Date 29 July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____
NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS
1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
