
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00121/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 December 2019                            |On 4 February 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                             Mr SELYM SEYD SALUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Nicalaou, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the re-making of an appeal against a decision of the respondent
    against a decision to deport him as a  foreign  national  offender  and
    upon refusal of his protection and human  rights  claim  on  8  October
    2018.  His appeal against the decision was allowed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 8 February 2019.  For the reasons
    set out in my decision promulgated on 11 September 2019, that  decision
    was set aside.  A copy of that decision is set out in the annex.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 June 2001 and  claimed
    asylum.  That claim was refused and on an appeal he was found not to be
    credible.  Following a further appeal in 2003, he was  found  to  be  a
    Somali national and from the Bajuni tribe.  That is not in dispute.  As
    the First-tier Tribunal noted at [3], the other  parts  of  his  claim,
    that his father and sister had been killed, and he had  been  in  Kenya
    for only a few months after leaving Kismayo, were "quite unreliable".

 3. At the hearing on 2 December 2019 I heard evidence from the  appellant.
    He adopted his witness statement adding that his family and friends had
    no money and were not able to support/assist him on return to  Somalia.
    He said he did not know anybody in Somalia.

 4. The appellant said that he spoke Arabic, Swahili  and  understood  some
    Somali by which he meant a few words like mother and father.   He  said
    that he had gone to college in the United Kingdom, had had  a  cleaning
    job and had no savings, having been in prison for five years.  Asked if
    he took full responsibility for his crime he said that he accepted what
    he did.

 5. In cross-examination the appellant said that  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom on his own.  He said that he was from Ras Kamboli, which is  an
    island in Somalia.  He said that he had worked for about six  years  in
    the United Kingdom.

 6. Asked if there was anything stopping him from getting work in  Somalia,
    he said he did not know anybody who could help him to get a job and  he
    would have no support.  He said that he was able  to  get  a  job  here
    through the Jobcentre.  He said  that  he  could  understand  a  little
    Somali and what he had said at the hearing in  2003  that  he  spoke  a
    little Somali.  He said that the family friends were not coming to  the
    hearing as they had children to look after.

 7. There was no re-examination.

 8. Mr Tufan  submitted  that,  relying  on  MA  (Somalia)  and  SB(refugee
    revocation; IDP camps) Somalia [2019] UKUT 358, in particular  at  [75]
    the relevant threshold here  is  that  established  in  N  and  D.   He
    submitted there was nothing here  which  reached  that  threshold,  the
    decision in MOJ making it clear that there was no longer any clan based
    persecution (see MS at [76]).

 9. Mr Tufan submitted that even if the appellant were in an  IDP  camp  it
    would not reach  the  Article  3  threshold,  asking  me  to  note  the
    appellant had managed to get employment in  the  United  Kingdom,  that
    there was nothing stopping him from getting a job in Mogadishu to where
    he would be expected to return and this would not be unduly harsh.   He
    submitted further that there would  be  no  risk  from  Al  Shabaab  in
    Kismayo if he were to return there.

10. Ms Nicalaou submitted that the appellant would likely to end up  in  an
    IDP camp and that this would on the facts of this  case  amount  to  an
    Article 3 breach.  She submitted he had limited prospects for obtaining
    work as he had no support network, only a  limited  language  skill  in
    Somali and no support.

11. Ms Nicalaou submitted that there was a cumulative suicide risk in  line
    with J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629.  Ms Nicalaou accepted that there was
    no medical evidence to support this but  it  indicated  an  appellant's
    subjective fear of return.

12. Ms Nicalaou submitted that Article 8 required also  to  be  considered.
    She said it had only been considered in relation to Article  3  on  the
    previous occasion.  She submitted that there were great strides in  his
    rehabilitation and very compelling circumstances.

The Law

13. The grounds of appeal in this case are set out in  section  84  of  the
    2002 Act and are as follows:-
       (1) An appeal under section 82(1)(a) (refusal  of  protection  claim)
      must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-
         (a) that removal of the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  would
         breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   under   the   Refugee
         Convention;
         (b) that removal of the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  would
         breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  in  relation  to  persons
         eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection;
         (c) that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would  be
         unlawful under section 6  of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (public
         authority not to act contrary to Human Rights Convention).
       (2) An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human rights  claim)
      must be brought on the ground that  the  decision  is  unlawful  under
      section 6  of the Human Rights Act 1998.
       (3) An  appeal  under  section  82(1)(c)  (revocation  of  protection
      status) must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-
         (a) that the decision to revoke the appellant's  protection  status
         breaches  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   Refugee
         Convention;
         (b) that the decision to revoke the appellant's  protection  status
         breaches the United Kingdom's obligations in  relation  to  persons
         eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection.

14. Section 72 of the 2002 Act provides (so far as is relevant) as follows:-



      Section 72 Serious criminal

      (1) This section applies for  the  purpose  of  the  construction  and
            application  of  Article  33(2)  of  the   Refugee   Convention
            (exclusion from protection).

      (2) A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
            judgment of a particularly serious crime and  to  constitute  a
            danger to the community of the United Kingdom is he is -

            (a)   convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

            (b)   sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  two
                 years.

      ...

      (9) Subsection (1) applies where -

            (a)   a person appeals under Section 82, 83 [F1, 83A] or 101 of
                 this Act or under section  2  of  the  Special  Immigration
                 Appeals Commission Act 1997 (c. 68) wholly or partly on the
                 ground that to remove him from or to require him  to  leave
                 the  United  Kingdom  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
                 obligations under the Refugee Convention, and

            (b)    the  Secretary  of  State  issues  a  certificate   that
                 presumptions under subsection (2), (3) or (4) apply to  the
                 person (subject to rebuttal).

      (10)    The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal -

             (a)  must being substantive  deliberation  on  the  appeal  by
                 considering the certificate, and

             (b)  if in agreement that presumptions under  subsection  (2),
                 (3) or (4) apply (having given the appellant an opportunity
                 for rebuttal) must dismiss the  appeal  in  so  far  as  it
                 relies on the grounds specified in subsection (9)(a).

15. Judge Gribble in the First-tier Tribunal  concluded  for  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons that the Section 72 certificate was made out.  I am
    satisfied that that decision was correct and it  is  evident  from  the
    skeleton argument and Rule 24 response served on 12  August  2019  that
    the appellant did not challenge that  conclusion,  submitting  at  [37]
    that the First-tier Tribunal had made no error  of  law  in  concluding
    that the appeal should be allowed by reference to  Articles  3  and  8,
    making no challenge to the decision with respect to Section 72, nor  is
    it averred that the appellant meets the  requirements  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.

16. In reaching my decision, I have had regard to the  background  evidence
    put before me, and to the submissions there on.

17. The starting point with respect to Country Guidance  on  conditions  is
    MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT  00442  (IAC)J.
    Ms Nicolaou did not submit that I should depart from it.

18. It must be borne in mind that the question put to the Tribunal  in  MOJ
    was as follows:-

         "Whether the current situation in Mogadishu is such as  to  entitle
         nationals of Somalia whose home area is Mogadishu or whose proposed
         area of relocation is Mogadishu to  succeed  in  their  claims  for
         refugee status, humanitarian protection status under Article  15(c)
         or protection against refoulement under Articles 3 or 2 of the ECHR
         solely on the basis  that  they  are  civilians  and  do  not  have
         powerful actors in a position to afford them adequate protection".

    It is also noted that one of the appellants  in  that  case,  SSM,  was
    seeking to revoke a deportation order passed on him as a  result  of  a
    sentence of three years and four months' imprisonment.  It is  also  of
    note that paragraph 408 provides as follows:-

         "408.     It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms (emphasis added)".

19. At paragraphs 409 to 423 the Tribunal in MOJ went on  to  consider  the
    position of IDPs, finding in particular:
    420. While it is likely that those who do  find  themselves  living  in
    inadequate makeshift accommodation in an IDP camp will be  experiencing
    adverse living conditions such as to engage the protection of Article 3
    of the ECHR, we do not see that it gives rise to  an  enhanced  Article
    15(c) risk since there is an insufficient nexus with the indiscriminate
    violence which, in any event, we have found to be not at  such  a  high
    level that all civilians face a real risk of  suffering  serious  harm.
    Nor does the evidence support the claim that there is an enhanced  risk
    of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab for those in the IDP camps or  that
    such a person is more likely to be caught up in an Al Shabaab attack of
    which he or she was not the intended target.


    421.    Other than for those with no alternative to living in makeshift
    accommodation in an IDP camp, the humanitarian  position  in  Mogadishu
    has continued  to  improve  since  the  country  guidance  of  AMM  was
    published. The famine is confined to  history,  although  food  aid  is
    still required and  is  still  available  to  many  who  need  it.  The
    "economic boom" has generated more opportunity for employment  and,  as
    always, self-employment in  the  form  of  small-scale  trading  is  an
    established  Somali  route  to  a  livelihood.  For   many   returnees,
    remittances will be important. The evidence before the Tribunal is that
    more than �16 million was sent in 2009 from the United Kingdom alone by
    way of remittances to Somalia. There is no reason to suppose that there
    has been any diminution on  that  level  of  support  being  sent  from
    abroad.


    422.    The fact that we have rejected the view that there  is  a  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm or ill treatment  to  civilians  or
    returnees in Mogadishu does  not  mean  that  no  Somali  national  can
    succeed in a refugee or humanitarian protection  or  Article  3  claim.
    Each case will fall to  be  decided  on  its  own  facts.  As  we  have
    observed, there will need to be a careful  assessment  of  all  of  the
    circumstances of a particular individual.


    423.    Two observations might be made about financial  considerations.
    Financial assistance from the Home Office may be available to voluntary
    returnees, in the form  of  a  grant  of  up  to  �1,500,  and  may  of
    significant assistance to a returnee. Second, if an individual was able
    to raise the level of funds necessary to pay for a  journey  to  Europe
    arranged by an agent, it may be difficult for him to assert that he now
    has no access to financial resources unless he is able to explain  what
    has changed and why, especially if he has been found not to be credible
    in the factual account he advanced in his appeal hearing.

20. The Upper Tribunal also said this in respect of Internal Relocation
    424. The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those  who
    originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to live  in  the
    city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing a  real
    risk of destitution. Large numbers of Somali  citizens  have  moved  to
    Mogadishu where, as we have seen there is now freedom of  movement  and
    no clan based discrimination.  Such  a  person  seeking  to  settle  in
    Mogadishu but who has not previously lived there would be able to do so
    provided he had either some form of social support network, which might
    be in the form of membership of a majority  clan  or  having  relatives
    living in the city, or having access to funds such as would be required
    to establish accommodation and a means of on-going support. That  might
    be in terms of continuing remittances or securing a  livelihood,  based
    on employment or self employment.


    425.    On the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu for a  person  of  a
    minority clan  with no former links to the city, no access to funds and
    no other form of clan, family or  social  support  is  unlikely  to  be
    realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home and some form
    of ongoing financial support there will be a real  risk  of  having  no
    alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an  IDP  camp
    where there is a real possibility of having to live in conditions  that
    will fall below acceptable humanitarian standards.

21. In SSHD v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 the Court of  Appeal  noted  at  [4]
    that the challenge was to  the  judge's  conclusion  that   deportation
    would violate article 3 of the Convention as he would  be  at  risk  of
    finding himself destitute and thus likely to end up  in  an  IDP  camp,
    where the conditions would be very poor.

22.  At [18] and [19] Burnett LJ held:


    18.  These cases demonstrate that to succeed in resisting removal on
    article 3 grounds on the basis of suggested poverty or deprivation on
    return which are not the responsibility of the receiving country or
    others in the sense described in para 282 of Sufi and Elmi, whether or
    not the feared deprivation is contributed to by a medical condition,
    the person liable to deportation must show circumstances which bring
    him within the approach of the Strasbourg Court in the D and N cases.
    The Circumstances of AS judged by the Article 3 Jurisprudence

    19.  In my judgment, the circumstances of AS fall far  short  of  being
    able to satisfy that approach. The highest at which his case can be put
    is that his  PTSD  and  depression  will  make  it  difficult  for  him
    integrate back into life in Somalia and have some impact on his ability
    to work. There is no suggestion that he is precluded from  working  and
    much to support the finding that he will be able to do so. It  is  also
    clear that, to the extent that it may  be  necessary,  there  is  every
    reason to suppose that he will be provided with financial  aid  by  his
    large and supportive family in the United Kingdom, quite apart from the
    prospect of some assistance from his clan.  There  is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that he will be unable to receive  the  relatively  commonplace
    medical treatment he currently enjoys if returned to Mogadishu.  It  is
    clear that this combination of features is  so  far  removed  from  the
    nature of exceptional and compelling  circumstances  envisaged  in  the
    Strasbourg cases as to make it clear that AS's  deportation  would  not
    breach article 3 of the Convention.

23. After discussing MOJ, Burnett LJ stated [31]:

    31.  I entirely accept that some of the observations made in the course
    of the discussion of IDP camps may  be  taken  to  suggest  that  if  a
    returning Somali national can show that he is likely to end  up  having
    to establish himself in an IDP camp, that would be sufficient to engage
    the protection of article 3. Yet such a stark proposition of cause  and
    effect would be inconsistent with the article 3  jurisprudence  of  the
    Strasbourg Court and binding authority of the domestic  courts.  In  my
    judgment the position is accurately stated in para 422.  That  draws  a
    proper distinction between humanitarian protection and  article  3  and
    recognises that the individual circumstances of  the  person  concerned
    must be considered. An appeal to article  3  which  suggests  that  the
    person concerned  would  face  impoverished  conditions  of  living  on
    removal to Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court  indicated  in  Sufi
    and Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the N case.
    Impoverished  conditions  which  were  the  direct  result  of  violent
    activities may be viewed differently as  would  cases  where  the  risk
    suggested is of direct violence itself.

24. It is accepted by Ms Nicalaou in her skeleton  argument  at  [25]  that
    meeting the situation in  the  headnote  at  [xii]  does  not  mean  an
    individual will face harm contrary to Article 3, each case  falling  to
    be decided on its own facts.

25. Whilst Ms Nicalaou makes submissions with  regard  to  the  Section  72
    certificate, there is no reference to material which was not considered
    by Judge Gribble.  The  appellant's  offence  was  without  doubt  very
    serious resulting in a sentence  to  ten  years'  imprisonment  upon  a
    guilty plea.  Whilst  I  note  the  OASys  Report  indicating  that  he
    presents a low risk of reoffending and that as  a  result  he  was  not
    eligible for the Resolve programme and Thinking  Skills  programme  nor
    had he completed offending behaviour courses because of this low  risk.
    Neither that, nor the fact that he  has  taken  positive  attitudes  in
    prison.  All of these were clearly taken into  account  by  the  judge.
    Accordingly, even had this been in issue I see no reason to depart from
    the conclusions  of  Judge  Gribble  which  I  respectfully  adopt  and
    endorse.

26. I accept that the appellant would, on current Home  Office  policy,  be
    sent to Mogadishu.  I accept, as did Judge Gribble, that the  appellant
    would have no relatives there and no support network.  Given that it is
    not in doubt that he has been in the United Kingdom for  nearly  twenty
    years, that is perhaps inevitable.  I accept also that he speaks little
    Somali and understands little Somali.  He does, however, speak English,
    Swahili and Arabic.

27. I accept the appellant would have some money given to him as part of  a
    relocation package on return to Somalia, I accept also that he is  from
    the Bajuni tribe and is originally from the Kismayo area.

28. I turn next to the guidance as set out in MOJ at (vii) to (xii):
     (vii)           A person returning to Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
    absence will look to his nuclear family, if he has one  living  in  the
    city,  for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing   a
    livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his  clan
    members who are not close relatives, such help is  only  likely  to  be
    forthcoming for majority clan  members,  as  minority  clans  may  have
    little to offer.
     (viii)         The significance of clan membership in  Mogadishu  has
    changed. Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms  and
    assist with access to livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a  protection
    function than previously. There are no clan militias in  Mogadishu,  no
    clan violence, and no clan based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
    minority clan members.
     (ix)              If it is accepted that a person facing a return  to
    Mogadishu after a period of absence has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
    relatives in the city to  assist  him  in  re-establishing  himself  on
    return, there will need to be  a  careful  assessment  of  all  of  the
    circumstances. These considerations will include, but are  not  limited
    to:
     .       circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

    .       length of absence from Mogadishu;

    .       family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

    .       access to financial resources;

    .       prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be  employment
    or self employment;

    .       availability of remittances from abroad;

    .       means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;

    .       why his ability to fund the  journey  to  the  West  no  longer
    enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.

     (x)               Put another way, it will be for the  person  facing
    return to explain why he would not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
    opportunities that have been produced by the economic boom,  especially
    as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are  taking  jobs  at
    the expense of those who have never been away.
     (xi)             It will, therefore, only be those with  no  clan  or
    family support who will not be in receipt of  remittances  from  abroad
    and who have no real prospect of securing access  to  a  livelihood  on
    return who will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling
    below that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.
     (xii)            The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply
    those who originate from Mogadishu that may  now  generally  return  to
    live in the city without being subjected to an Article  15(c)  risk  or
    facing a real risk of destitution. On the  other  hand,  relocation  in
    Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no former links to  the
    city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or  social
    support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of  means  to
    establish a home and some form of ongoing financial support there  will
    be a real risk of having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
    accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a real  possibility  of
    having  to  live  in  conditions   that  will  fall  below   acceptable
    humanitarian standards.

29. I also have regard to SB:, the headnote of which provides:
    (1) In Secretary of State for the Home Department v MS (Somalia) [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1345, the Court of Appeal  has  authoritatively  decided  that
    refugee status can be revoked on the basis that the refugee now has the
    ability to relocate internally within the country of their  nationality
    or former habitual residence. The authoritative status of the Court  of
    Appeal's judgments in MS (Somalia ) is not affected by  the  fact  that
    counsel for MS conceded that internal  relocation  could  in  principle
    lead to cessation of refugee status. There is also nothing in the House
    of Lords' opinions in R  (Hoxha)  v  Special  Adjudicator  and  Another
    [2005] UKHL 19 that compels a contrary conclusion to  that  reached  by
    the Court of Appeal.
    (2) The conclusion of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the
    Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 was that the country
    guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 442
    (IAC) did not include any finding that a person who finds themselves in
    an IDP camp is thereby likely to face Article 3 ECHR harm (having
    regard to the high threshold established by D v United Kingdom (1997)
    24 EHRR 43 and N v United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 39). Although that
    conclusion may have been obiter, it was confirmed by Hamblen LJ in MS
    (Somalia ). There is nothing in the country guidance in AA and Others
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia [2011] UKUT 445
    (IAC) that requires a different view to be taken of the position of
    such a person. It will be an error of law for a judge to refuse to
    follow the Court of Appeal's conclusion on this issue.

30. At paragraph [55] of its decision in SB, the Upper Tribunal wrote this:

    55. We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis's submissions on this  issue  and
    respectfully decline to follow those of Mr Toal. The largely naturally-
    caused events that led the Upper Tribunal in AMM to find that the  high
    threshold for Article 3 harm, as regards conditions in IDP  camps,  had
    been met, no longer applied at the time of MOJ . Given  that  there  is
    nothing in MOJ or anywhere else that we have seen which suggests  human
    agency is responsible for the generalised conditions faced in IDP camps
    (as opposed to instances of specific harm), that high  threshold  needs
    to be met. Insofar as MOJ might have been read to suggest otherwise, or
    insofar as it might otherwise be read as indicating a generalised  risk
    of Article 3 harm, Burnett LJ's judgment cogently explains why that  is
    wrong. Irrespective of whether his judgment is formally binding on  us,
    it is fully-reasoned and compelling and  should  be  followed.  In  our
    view, it will be an error of law for a judge to refuse to do so.

31. Turning first to paragraph (ix) of the guidance, I accept that in  this
    case the appellant had never been in  Mogadishu  before  his  departure
    from Somalia.  He has been absent from the country for  nineteen,  very
    nearly twenty years, and I accept has no family or clan associations to
    call upon in Mogadishu.  He will, however, have access to some funds on
    return owing to a relocation grant.  I accept  that  he  is  a  healthy
    adult male and there appears to be no reason given as to why  he  could
    not obtain some form of employment, be it only unskilled or  temporary.
    I accept he will not have a remittance from abroad and I note  that  he
    was able to get some employment  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Given  the
    length of time that has elapsed since he came to the United Kingdom, it
    is difficult to see that his ability  to  fund  his  departure  is  now
    relevant.

32. Ms Nicalaou did not draw my attention to  any  material  regarding  the
    situation in any IDP camps.  Whilst it may well be  difficult  for  the
    appellant, I found that he has failed to satisfy me that he is at  risk
    of an Article 3 harm bearing in mind the high threshold established  by
    D and N.  In  reaching  that  conclusion  I  have  had  regard  to  the
    submissions  made  regarding  Paposhvili.  I  find  no  merit  in   the
    submission that Said and MA (Somalia) must be viewed through  the  lens
    of the most recent Paposhvili  v  Belgium  [2016]  EHRR  1113.   In  AM
    (Zimbabwe)[2018] EWCA Civ 64 Sales LJ at [39] observed that  the  Grand
    Chamber in Paposhivili only intended to make a very modest extension of
    the protection under Article 3 in medical cases. There is nothing there
    to support

33. I am not satisfied that there is a risk  of  the  appellant  committing
    suicide.  There is  simply  the  unsupported  comment  in  the  witness
    statement that he would kill  himself.   This  is  unsupported  by  any
    medical  evidence  or  evidence  of  previous  attempts.   Accordingly,
    applying the principles in J v SSHD, I am not satisfied that  there  is
    any risk of the appellant committing suicide  such  as  taken  together
    with  the  other  issues  would  cross  the  J  threshold.   There   is
    insufficient evidence to show  that  the  appellant  suffers  from  any
    mental ill health.

34. Having reached these conclusions, I am satisfied that  the  appellant's
    removal would not be in  breach  of  Article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

35. I therefore turn to the issue of Article 8.


         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."


36. in MS (s.117C(6): "very compelling circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]
    UKUT 122 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal said this:
       In determining pursuant  to  section  117C(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  whether  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2  in
    subsections (4) and (5), such as to outweigh the public interest in the
    deportation of a foreign criminal, a court or tribunal must  take  into
    account,   together   with   any   other   relevant   public   interest
    considerations, the seriousness of the particular offence of which  the
    foreign criminal was convicted; not merely whether the foreign criminal
    was or was not sentenced to imprisonment of more than 4 years.  Nothing
    in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53 demands a contrary conclusion.

37. It is also evident from the decision of the Upper Tribunal in that case
    that if Exception 1 or 2 is not met, then it would be necessary  to  go
    on  to  consider  whether  there  are   nonetheless   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

38. The appellant is a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a  period
    of imprisonment for at  least  four  years.   Accordingly,  the  public
    interest  requires  deportation  unless  there  are   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.   I
    therefore turn first to those exceptions in order to  consider  whether
    and to what extent he meets these requirements.

39. It is evident that the appellant does not meet exception 2.   There  is
    no evidence that he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
    partner or a  qualifying  child.   With  regard  to  Exception  1,  the
    appellant was born on 4 August 1970.  He entered the United Kingdom  on
    3 June 2001 aged nearly 30 years of age.  Even  assuming  his  presence
    had been lawful retrospectively he has not been  lawfully  resident  in
    the United Kingdom for most of his life.  He  therefore  falls  at  the
    first hurdle in Exception 1.  Second, and there were no submissions  on
    this point, there are indicators that the appellant is not socially and
    culturally integrated into the United Kingdom given his  serious  crime
    and drug taking prior to his imprisonment.  He has also been in  prison
    for five years and accordingly, any integration that he  may  have  had
    has diminished.

40. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the appellant comes anywhere  near
    the exceptions in Section 117C or meets the  requirements  set  out  in
    paragraph 399(a) or (b) or of paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules.

41. Given that this is a case where the appellant  was  sentenced  to  more
    than four years, I have regard to the seriousness  of  the  conviction.
    As Judge Gribble noted the appellant continues to present a  continuing
    risk to the public [64].  Further, as can be seen from  the  sentencing
    remarks from the trial judge, the appellant subjected  the  complainant
    to a sustained and  brutal  attack  of  extreme  violence  whereby  she
    suffered life threatening injuries; that is multiple fractures  to  the
    skull, associated brain injury.  The judge also noted that this  was  a
    category  1  offence  and  there  were  factors  which  increased   its
    seriousness, namely the deliberate attempts by the appellant to prevent
    the victim from obtaining urgent medical assistance  she  required  and
    secondly attempts to conceal and dispose of evidence and,  the  ongoing
    effect on the victim.  Further, the judge noted  that  had  the  matter
    gone to trial the appropriate sentence would be one to thirteen  years'
    imprisonment.

42. Taking this into account and given the lack of  other  factors  in  the
    appellant's favour, I conclude that there  is  nothing  even  accepting
    that the appellant will be reduced to very difficult  circumstances  in
    Somalia, such as to outweigh the very strong  public  interest  in  his
    deportation.  Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds as
    well.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.


 2) I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


 3) No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 31 January 2020

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00121/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 August 2019                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                              SELYM SEYD SALUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Nicolaou, instructed by Turpin & Miller


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Gribble  promulgated  on  8  February  2019,
    allowing Mr Salum's appeal against a decision made to deport him.  That
    decision was consequent on his conviction on 29 October  2014  when  he
    pleaded guilty to an  offence  of  wounding  with  intent  contrary  to
    Section 18 of Offences Against the Person Act 1861  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to ten years in prison.  The notice of  intention  to  deport
    was served on 15 July 2017; a notice of  intention  to  revoke  refugee
    status was served on 11 July 2018.

 2. Mr Salum's (whom I refer to as the appellant as he was before the First-
    tier)  status  was  revoked  and  the  Secretary  of  State  issued   a
    certificate under Section 72 of Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.

 3. The appellant is from the Bajuni tribe and is from Kismayo in  Southern
    Somalia.  His case is that he would be at risk  on  return  to  Somalia
    both of persecution and/or Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

 4. The Secretary of State's case was that there was no basis to rebut  the
    presumption under the Section  72  certificate  and  that  due  to  his
    offence he was excluded from a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.  It was also  the  Secretary  of
    State's case that the appellant had ceased in the event to be a refugee
    further to Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention as circumstances  in
    Somalia have changed since he has obtained status and that  Kismayo  as
    generally a safe place it should not present a general risk contrary to
    Article 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention, or Article 15(c) of  the
    Qualification Directive.  The Secretary  of  State  further  considered
    that even if there were difficulties in  travelling  between  Mogadishu
    and Kismayo, nonetheless he could relocate to Mogadishu and that  there
    would not be significant obstacles to  re-establishing  a  life  there.
    The  Secretary  of  State  concluded  also  that  there  were  no  very
    compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions in Section  117C
    of the 2002 Act.

 5. On appeal, the judge concluded that: -

      i) the appellant poses a continuing risk to the public  and  thus  the
         presumption under Section 72 is not rebutted [64];

     ii) the appellant is excluded from a grant of  humanitarian  protection
         pursuant to paragraph 399D Immigration Rules;

    iii) the appellant  has no family in the United Kingdom who could assist
         him  [72];  and  that,  considering  whether  on  return  first  to
         Mogadishu he would face treatment likely to breach Article 3  [71],
         following MOJ & Ors that he falls  squarely  within  the  class  of
         people set out at paragraph (ix) and (x) he  would  face  treatment
         such as to breach Article 3 and as such, return is unrealistic  and
         unduly harsh, and that basically he qualified for protection  under
         Article 3 [79];

     iv) even if that  were  not  so,  following  KS  (Minority  Clans)  the
         appellant would be at risk on return to Kismayo and  thus  succeeds
         on Article 3 grounds.

 6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had erred in that she had: -

      i) failed to make adequate findings as to why the appellant  would  be
         unable to return to Mogadishu without becoming destitute;




     ii) failing also to note that all of the criteria in  head  note  (xii)
         with reference to (ix) must be satisfied;

    iii) that even if the appellant were likely to find himself in makeshift
         accommodation, prospect of return to an IDP camp was not sufficient
         to invoke Article 3 - see Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442,  upheld  in  MA
         (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994;

     iv) that although the  appellant  would  find  the  relocation  process
         difficult, his status as a healthy adult male will put  him  in  no
         worse position than any other deportee; it was a matter  of  choice
         for the appellant whether he remains in Mogadishu or travels on  to
         his home area of Kismayo;

      v) that although KS was country guidance, to be read in light  of  the
         later case and which makes binding findings on clan and risk.

 7. On 26 June 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds granted  permission  on  all
    grounds.

 8. The starting point must be an appreciation that the judge  had  already
    held that the appellant was excluded from the protection of the Refugee
    Convention by operation of the Section 72 certificate and that  he  was
    not entitled to humanitarian protection.

 9. Turning to the grounds, I consider that there is significant  merit  in
    the respondent's observations that the judge's reasoning as to why  the
    appellant  would  be  unable  to  return  to  Mogadishu  without  being
    destitute are not sufficiently grounded in evidence.  While I note  the
    submission in the Rule  24  response  that  the  understanding  of  the
    relevancy of employment is to be seen through the lens of what is  said
    at paragraph 351 of MOJ, it was  nonetheless  speculative  to  conclude
    that the appellant would not be able to get employment owing to his age
    and the evidence  with  regard  to  his  language  abilities  is,  with
    respect, based on supposition  [72]  rather  than  evidence.   Further,
    contrary to what is  averred  in  the  Rule  24  response,  it  is  not
    necessarily so that those with convictions will struggle to  find  work
    in Somalia where that may or may not be  known.   To  say  that  it  is
    "trite" is not sufficient, there were  other  menial  jobs  other  than
    construction or labouring, the two examples cited by the judge at [77].

10. I consider that there is also merit in the fact that the judge did  not
    consider the availability of financial support which may  be  available
    under the facilitated return scheme.  It is a factor to be  taken  into
    account in assessing the likely circumstances on return.   Accordingly,
    I am satisfied that the  judge  has  not  made  proper  and  sufficient
    findings to show that the appellant would have no  alternative  but  to
    live in makeshift accommodation although I  do  accept  that  there  is
    little merit in the observation made by the  respondent  that  all  the
    criteria must be satisfied which makes little sense.

11. Accordingly, the finding that  the  appellant  would  be  in  makeshift
    accommodation is unsafe and it follows,  therefore,  that  the  finding
    that return would be "harsh and unrealistic" [79] is not sustainable.

12. With regard to the  alternative  finding  at  [80]  to  [81]  that  the
    appellant would have been at risk in  his  home,  the  judge  does  not
    appear properly to have  considered  whether  relocation  to  Mogadishu
    would have been unduly harsh  or  unreasonable;  and,  given  that  the
    findings that it would not be safe are, for the reasons set above,  not
    sustainable, this finding is also unsafe. The guidance set out in KS as
    to the possibility of internal relocation must now been seen  in  light
    of MOJ.

13. For these reasons, the decision involved the making of an error law and
    I set it aside.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal will be listed for 2 hours.

 3. If any of  the  parties  wish  to  adduce  further  evidence,  oral  or
    otherwise, they must make an application pursuant to rule  15  (2A)  of
    the  Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  at least  21  days
    before the hearing, such application to be accompanied by the  evidence
    upon which it is sought to rely.



Signed                                  Date 2 September 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


