
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00039/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 June 2019                               |On 18 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                              ABDIKADER KADEED
                                                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Imamovic
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 14 November 1987 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Somalia. My decision promulgated on 3 May 2019,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law  and  set
    aside its decision.

 2. Following the making of a transfer  order,  the  resumed  hearing  took
    place before me at Birmingham. I heard evidence from the appellant, Mrs
    Bulali, the appellant's mother and his brother, Mr  Kamal  Kameed,  who
    had also written a letter in support of the appellant.


 3. The burden of proof is on the  appellant.  The  standard  of  proof  as
    regards both the likelihood of persecution  and  the  establishment  of
    past and future events  is  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood.  The
    appellant must show that there are substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that be a real risk that he will face persecution and ill-treatment  on
    return to Somalia. In the appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds,  standard
    proof is the balance of probabilities.


 4. I shall address the issues remaining to be determined in the appeal  as
    indicated by Judge Rintoul.

    Whether the section 72 certificate is made out?


 5. Section 72(2) of the 2002 Act (as amended) provides:

         (2)  A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by  a  final
         judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
         to the community of the United Kingdom if he is-

             (a)  convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

             (b)  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  two
             years.

 6. Given the severity of the  appellant's  criminal  offending,  he  falls
    within the provisions of the section. The presumption in favour of  his
    exclusion from refugee protection may  be  rebutted  by  evidence.  The
    appellant has not been convicted of any offence  although  until  2017,
    following his release from imprisonment,  he  has  been  under  licence
    restrictions. However, as Mr Mills who appeared for  the  Secretary  of
    State submitted, the appellant's  offending  continued  after  2014  by
    which time he had received a letter from the Home Office warning him of
    the possibility of deportation and the removal of his  refugee  status.
    Ms Imamovic,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant,  submitted  that  the
    appellant's offending had taken place when he was a  young  adult.  She
    submitted that he had  reformed,  his  second  period  of  imprisonment
    having 'really changed him.'

 7. The appellant's criminal offending is of an  extremely  serious  nature
    involving the supply of hard drugs. I take the force of the point  made
    by Mr Mills that, even when it became apparent that the appellant might
    be removed from the United Kingdom, he continued to offend. It is  also
    difficult to be persuaded that he is behaviour has  changed  in  recent
    times given that he had been released on licence; is difficult  to  say
    whether he  has  refrained  from  offending  because  he  has  forsworn
    criminality, as he claims, or because he had not wished to be  returned
    to prison during the currency of his licence which ended  in  2017.  On
    balance, I find that and the fact the appellant has failed to rebut the
    presumption in favour of denying  him  refugee  protection.  I  do  not
    accept the fact that the appellant 'turned himself in for a  breach  of
    his probation licence is sufficient to show that he has genuinely  been
    rehabilitated and is no  longer  a  danger  to  the  community.  Having
    considered all the evidence carefully, I find that that instance was an
    indication of the appellant's unwillingness to be  returned  to  prison
    rather than a genuine move away from a pattern of criminal conduct.

    Whether the  applicant  is  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  of  sufficient
    severity to constitute persecution and/or a breach of  Article  3  ECHR
    and return to Somalia

 8. The appellant's mother gave evidence regarding the whereabouts  of  any
    family members in Somalia. Mr Mills, in his  submissions,  agreed  that
    there was no evidence that the appellant had family members  living  in
    Somalia. The appellant's mother said that she has nine children in all.
    She said that the appellant's siblings would not support him if he left
    to live in Somalia. In his evidence, the appellant said  that,  at  the
    present time, his mother father and brother support him financially. He
    has little memory of living in Somalia, a country which he left when he
    was 14 years old. Cross-examined, the appellant said  that  his  family
    had supported him in the United  Kingdom  by  paying  his  legal  fees.
    However, he denied that financial support would  be  available  to  him
    should he move to Somalia. He said that supporting him in Somalia would
    be 'a bit different... It would be hard...[the family] had only  helped
    me in the short term.' Mr Kadeed told me that he had been  appalled  by
    the appellant's offending. He would find it difficult to give financial
    support to the appellant in Somalia since he was spending such funds as
    he had upon supporting himself and his studies in the  United  Kingdom.
    However, he did comment that another brother, who is married  with  two
    children and with whom  Mr  Kadeed  currently  lives,  'could  possibly
    support the appellant' if he were to move abroad.

 9. The evidence which the witnesses gave  regarding  the  lack  of  family
    members or friends in Somalia is not controversial given that Mr  Mills
    has accepted that the appellant has no family  living  there.  To  that
    extent, I accept the evidence of the witnesses as  true  and  accurate.
    However, I found the evidence which each of  the  witnesses,  including
    the appellant, gave regarding the possibility of the appellant's  being
    funded by family members once he is in Somalia to be less impressive. I
    acknowledge that none  of  the  appellant's  siblings  appear  to  have
    particularly well-paid jobs and  I  acknowledge  also  that  they  have
    family commitments of their own. However, they have demonstrated  their
    willingness to support the appellant financially including by assisting
    with  payment  of  his  legal  fees  which  are  likely  to  have  been
    substantial. I do not accept  that  that  willingness  to  support  the
    appellant will evaporate should he be deported to Somalia. I  am  aware
    also that relatively small amounts of funding may go a very long way in
    a country where the cost of living is substantially lower than it is in
    the United Kingdom. I find that, if  the  appellant  is  deported,  his
    family will support him and that such support as he will  receive  will
    be reliable and consistent  and  will  enable  him  to  avoid  becoming
    destitute.

    Is the appellant likely to be exposed to Article 3 ECHR risk in Somalia
    as a member of a minority clan?

10. The current country guidance remains MOJ (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia
    [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC). I  am  aware  that  I  need  to  consider  the
    personal circumstances of the appellant in determining whether he would
    be at risk and return. Headnote (ix) of MOJ provides:

         "(ix)    If it is  accepted  that  a  person  facing  a  return  to
             Mogadishu after a period of absence has no nuclear  family  or
             close relatives in the city to assist him  in  re-establishing
             himself on return, there will need to be a careful  assessment
             of  all  of  the  circumstances.  These  considerations   will
             include, but are not limited to:


             .    circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;


             .    length of absence from Mogadishu;


             .    family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;


             .    access to financial resources;


             .    prospects of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
             employment or self-employment;


             .    availability of remittances from abroad;


             .    means of support during the  time  spent  in  the  United
             Kingdom;


             .    why his ability to fund the journey to the West no longer
             enables an appellant to secure financial support on return"


11. As regards the appellant's clan affiliations, both parties  accept  the
    appellant is a member of  the  Asraf,  a  minority  clan.  Ms  Imamovic
    submitted that the existing country guidance of MOJ has been superseded
    by developments in Somalia. She relies upon the most recent Home Office
    CPINs which are dated September 2018 and  January  2019.  The  societal
    discrimination falling short of ill-treatment identified  in  MOJ  has,
    she submitted, given way to a greater threat to minority  clan  members
    from militia groups and majority clan members. She relies also  upon  a
    report of Omer  Ahmed  which  is  dated  18  April  2019.  This  report
    concludes that the appellant is at significant risk as a minority  clan
    member both from violence at the hands of militia members but  also  in
    respect of destitution should he be compelled to live in or near an IDP
    camp.

12. Mr Ahmed's report is lengthy. However, it is  very  short  indeed  upon
    quoted sources or specific examples of ill-treatment/destitution  faced
    by individuals returning to Somalia. Many of the assertions made in the
    report are, as Mr Mills submitted, wholly unsupported  by  evidence  of
    any sort. In  essence,  the  report  simply  seeks  to  contradict  the
    findings of the Upper Tribunal in MOJ  but  seeks  only  to  do  so  by
    asserting that the country guidance is wrong or out  of  date;  no  new
    properly sourced evidence is advanced which is  capable  of  converting
    assertions into expert opinion evidence of real value. Having regard to
    these criticisms, the weight which I  attach  the  report  is  limited.
    Likewise, I agree with Mr Mills's submission that the most recent CPINs
    do not contradict guidance set out in MOJ which, in my opinion, remains
    good country guidance as at the date of  this  hearing.  I  acknowledge
    that the appellant has not been in Somalia since he was  14  years  old
    and that he may, at least at first, find it difficult to find  work  in
    the country. However, he has basic British  educational  qualifications
    in  information  technology  and  is  fluent   in   English   language,
    accomplishments which  may  assist  him  in  finding  employment.  Most
    importantly, I find as a fact that the appellant will  receive  regular
    and reliable funding from his  family  members  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom. That funding, albeit perhaps modest, will in my finding enable
    him to avoid destitution or having to live  in  or  near  an  IDP  camp
    whilst he establishes himself and seeks work. I do not accept that  his
    membership of the Asraf clan will per  se  expose  him  to  risk  going
    beyond societal discrimination. I find  the  appellant  has  failed  to
    establish that there are substantial grounds for finding there to be  a
    real risk of his being exposed to Article  3  ECHR  ill-treatment  upon
    return to Somalia.

13. The appellant's partner, Ayan Aden, has filed and served a statement in
    support of the appellant's appeal. The couple have been together  since
    2009 but 'many obstacles' (no doubt including the appellant's  criminal
    offending) have prevented them  from  getting  married.  I  accept  the
    appellant is in a relationship with Ms  Ayan.  However,  they  have  no
    children and do not cohabit. I accept the submission of Mr  Mills  that
    the severity of this appellant's criminal offending,  involving  as  it
    has the supply of hard  drugs,  delivers  such  weight  to  the  public
    interest  concerned  with  his  deportation  that   any   family   life
    connections or his private life, as  represented  by  his  relationship
    with Ms Ayan, are outweighed rendering his deportation proportionate in
    all respects.

14. In  the  circumstances,  I  find  the  appellant's  appeal  should  the
    dismissed on all grounds.



Notice of Decision

    I have remade the decision. The appellant's appeal is dismissed on  all
    grounds.






Signed                              Date 18 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
