
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00097/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                           |On 27 March 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SRA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sharma instructed by Portway Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (SRA).  A failure to comply  with
    this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State,  I  shall  for
    convenience refer to the parties as they appeared before the First-tier
    Tribunal.



Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on [ ] 1996.  He  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 11  April  2010  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor.  On 14 October 2010, he claimed asylum.   That  application  was
    refused on 27 May 2010 but, as he was an unaccompanied  minor,  he  was
    granted discretionary leave until 1 June 2014.

 4. On 11 June 2011 the appellant  appealed  against  the  refusal  of  his
    asylum claim.  On 7  February  2012,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Osborne) allowed his appeal both on asylum and  human  rights  grounds.
    As a consequence, on 6 March 2012, the appellant  was  granted  refugee
    status with five years' leave to remain on that  basis  valid  until  7
    February 2017.

 5. Between 25 March 2013 and 19 January 2016, the appellant was  convicted
    of a number of offences.  Most recently, on 19  January  2012,  he  was
    convicted at the Bristol Crown Court of wounding or inflicting grievous
    bodily harm under s.20 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861  and
    sentenced to a period of eighteen months' detention in a Youth Offender
    Institution.  He was also, on that occasion, convicted of possessing an
    imitation firearm with intent to cause fear and violence and  sentenced
    to a consecutive period of nine months' detention in a  Youth  Offender
    Institution.  On a third count, of assault  occasioning  actual  bodily
    harm contrary to  s.47  of  the  OAPA  1861,  he  was  sentenced  to  a
    concurrent  term  of  six  months'  detention  in  a  Young   Offenders
    Institution.  The total sentence was,  therefore,  one  of  27  months'
    detention in a Young Offenders Institution.

 6. On 18 April 2016, the appellant was issued with a notice of a  decision
    to make a deportation order against him as a result of his convictions.



 7. On 2 February 2017, the appellant was issued with  notification  of  an
    intention to revoke his refugee status.  Further  representations  were
    made on 5 May 2017 and on 22 May 2017, he  was  detained  under  powers
    contained within the Immigration Act 1971.

 8. On 18 July 2017, a decision was made to deport the appellant and revoke
    his protection status.  In addition, his human rights  claim  was  also
    refused.  A deportation order was signed on 18 July 2017.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge I D Boyes on 30 August 2017.

10. Before Judge Boyes, the appellant (through his  Counsel)  withdrew  any
    reliance upon the Refugee Convention and a claim that he was at risk as
    a result of his  conversion  to  Judaism  and  because  of  his  sexual
    orientation, namely that he is bisexual.  The  appellant  continued  to
    contend that  his  return  to  Iraq  would  breach  Art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC) and Arts 3 and 8
    of the ECHR.

11. Judge Boyes dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds  finding
    that he had fabricated his claim.

12. Further, Judge Boyes dismissed the appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds under Art 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive  on  the  basis
    that the appellant had  failed  to  establish  the  required  level  of
    indiscriminate violence in Baghdad (his home area).

13. However, Judge Boyes went on to allow the appeal under  Art  3  of  the
    ECHR.  He found that the appellant would not be able to obtain  a  CSID
    document and that he had no family left in Baghdad  and,  applying  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in AA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944,
    there was a real risk that the appellant would be destitute and,  as  a
    consequence, at risk of serious harm contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

14. Finally, the judge, having found in the appellant's favour under Art  3
    of the ECHR, declined to make any decision in  respect  of  his  Art  8
    claim.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on three grounds.  On 17 October 2017, the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge A M Black) granted the Secretary of State permission to  appeal.



16. On 22 November 2017, the appellant filed a rule 24 response seeking  to
    uphold the judge's decision allowing the appellant's appeal  under  Art
    3.

The Secretary of State's Challenge

17. Before me, Mr Mills, who represented the  Secretary  of  State,  relied
    upon the three grounds of appeal upon which permission  to  appeal  was
    granted although  he  acknowledged  that  he  was  in  difficulties  in
    sustaining ground 3.

18. Ground 1 sets out  two  distinct  grounds  of  appeal.   First,  it  is
    contended that the judge erred in law by  not  determining  the  Art  8
    claim made by the appellant.  Reliance is placed upon on  s.86  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  which  states  in  sub-
    section (2) that:

         "The Tribunal must determine -

         (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal, and

         (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider".

19. Mr Mills acknowledged that, notwithstanding s.86, the judge's error  in
    failing to deal with Art 8 may not be material to the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

20. Secondly, Mr Mills placed reliance upon the remainder of ground 1 which
    contended that the judge  had  approached  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant could obtain a CSID on return to Baghdad  with  a  "preformed
    and closed view" such that he was "biased and unfair".

21. Mr Mills relied upon the extract from the Presenting Officer's  hearing
    note set out in para 3 of the grounds as follows:

         "I cross-examined the appellant,  he  maintained  that  he  had  no
         contact with his family in Iraq and had made  no  effort  to  trace
         them.

         Before I could cross-examine the witness IJ said  that  he  thought
         there was no evidence the  appellant  could  obtain  a  CSID  in  a
         reasonable period.  He asked if I had anything to add, I accepted I
         was in some difficulty on  this  point  but  highlighted  that  the
         appellant may have family ties in Iraq he had just not made efforts
         to trace them the IJ stated that it  was  only  that  he  may  have
         family and there was no legal obligation for him to trace  them  so
         he said he would allow the appeal on this point".

22. Mr Mills, relying on the terms of the ground, submitted that the  judge
    had fallen into error by refusing to hear further  witnesses  and  hear
    further submissions beyond the  exchange  recorded  by  the  Presenting
    Officer on the issue of fact, namely whether the appellant could obtain
    a CSID (which he currently lacked) on return to Iraq.

23. Ground 2 challenges the judge's finding in para 44 of his decision that
    the appellant had no family in Iraq such as to assist him in  obtaining
    a CSID or to provide support to him.  Relying on  ground  2,  Mr  Mills
    submitted that the judge had, in effect, reversed the burden  of  proof
    when he had said that he would "work on the assumption that there is no
    family there as I have not been told there are any".

24. Mr Mills also submitted that the judge had failed  properly  to  reason
    why he accepted the appellant's evidence on  this  issue  when  he  had
    found that the appellant had lied about his asylum  claim.   He  placed
    reliance upon the Supreme Court's  judgment  in  MA  (Somalia)  v  SSHD
    [2010] UKSC 49 at [47]-[48] where it was acknowledged that  a  Tribunal
    could determine that an  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  a  fact
    because he had previously told lies.  Mr Mills submitted that the judge
    had given no reasons in para 44 sufficient to show that  he  had  taken
    into account that the appellant lied but, nevertheless, had  discharged
    the burden of proof upon him to show that he had no family  in  Baghdad
    as the judge had found.

25. Ground 3 raises two issues.  First, it seeks to challenge  the  judge's
    approach to subsidiary protection.  Secondly, it contends  that  merely
    because the judge found that the appellant would be destitute does  not
    in itself, necessarily, establish a breach of Art 3.

26. In relation to these two points, Mr Mills  did  not  pursue  the  first
    point, and in my judgment, rightly so.  The  judge  found  against  the
    appellant on subsidiary protection under Art  15(c)  and  that  is  not
    challenged.  The passage in the judge's determination at para 38  which
    is challenged in the grounds, appears to have no bearing  upon  any  of
    the findings that he subsequently made.  His statement that there is  a
    difference between subsidiary protection and  Art  3  of  the  ECHR  by
    reference  to  claims  based  upon  differentially  available   medical
    treatment in the UK and the individual's home country, is borne out  by
    the CJEC's decision in M'bodj v �tat Belge [2015] Imm AR  3.   However,
    as was confirmed by the parties before me, the appellant did  not  seek
    to rely on any medical condition that  might  have  engaged  the  issue
    raised by the judge at para 38 of his decision.

27. Further, as regards the second point  raised  in  ground  3,  Mr  Mills
    accepted that he was in some difficulty as the Court of Appeal (in  the
    relevant country guidance decision) of AA (Iraq) had concluded that  if
    an individual returned to Iraq without  a  CSID,  and  no  prospect  of
    obtaining one within a reasonable time and no family support to assist,
    there was a real risk that he would be destitute and a breach of Art  3
    would  be established.  Mr Mills indicated that he wished to  place  no
    further reliance on this aspect of ground 3.

The Appellant's Submissions

28. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Sharma, who  represented  the  appellant
    (and had done so before Judge Boyes), acknowledged that  the  appellant
    had retracted his reliance upon the asylum ground at the outset of  the
    hearing.  She acknowledged that no  challenge  had  been  made  to  the
    judge's adverse finding that the appellant had lied about  that  aspect
    of his claim.

29. Ms Sharma  submitted,  however,  that  in  reaching  his  findings,  in
    particular in para 44, the judge had taken a common sense view.   There
    was an earlier decision in his  favour  on  asylum  grounds.   It  was,
    therefore, accepted that the appellant had not been back to Iraq  since
    he was 6 years old.  He had been out of Iraq since  2010  and,  it  was
    open to the judge to find that, therefore, as he could not say who  was
    there or that he had any knowledge relevant to obtaining a CSID, it was
    open to the judge to find that he would not be able to  obtain  a  CSID
    within a reasonable timeframe and he had no one to support him.

30. Ms Sharma accepted that the judge had made it clear that the CSID issue
    was the paramount issue and that he did not  need  to  hear  the  other
    witnesses concerned with Art 8.  She submitted  that  even  if  he  had
    heard those witnesses, he would still have reached the decision that he
    did.

31. Ms  Sharma  submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  in  para  44  were
    sustainable and the appeal was properly allowed  under  Art  3  of  the
    ECHR.

Discussion

32. At the hearing, I indicated to both  representatives  that  if  it  was
    necessary to the outcome of the appeal before me that I should reach  a
    decision on the allegation in ground 1 which raised  procedural  issues
    at the hearing, then it would be necessary to  re-list  the  appeal  in
    order to obtain statements both from the  Presenting  Officer  and  the
    appellant's representative who was, of course,  Ms  Sharma  before  the
    judge.  In addition, it would be usual practice  to  seek  the  judge's
    comments on the allegation made in the grounds.

33. I indicated to the parties that I would reach a  view  on  that  matter
    following the hearing having considered all the arguments.  I have  now
    done so.  As will shortly become  clear,  I  am  satisfied  that  Judge
    Boyes' decision cannot stand, in  essence,  because  the  Secretary  of
    State has established ground 2.  It is not, therefore, necessary to re-
    list the hearing and issue the appropriate directions for the necessary
    evidence to be produced in order to reach  a  conclusion  on  ground  1
    insofar as it raises an allegation of procedural  irregularity  at  the
    hearing.  There was no supporting statement from the Presenting Officer
    and the only "evidence" is found in a quotation from her "hearing  note
    records" set out in the grounds.  That is not free from ambiguity as to
    what happened at the hearing, in particular in relation to  the  cross-
    examination  of  the  appellant.   There  is  no  evidence   from   the
    appellant's representative at the hearing (Ms  Sharma)  on  the  issue.
    She was, of course, not in a position to provide any evidence before me
    as she continued to represent the  appellant.   Likewise,  the  judge's
    comments on the procedural aspects raised in the grounds have not  been
    sought.  It would be wrong for me to make any finding or to say more in
    relation to this aspect of ground  1  without  any  available  evidence
    being provided by the parties and the judge having  an  opportunity  to
    comment.

34. Ground 2 is, however, made out and for that reason the decision  cannot
    stand.

35. At para 44, the judge says this:

         "Having considered the matter with care I find that  the  appellant
         could not obtain a CSID card  within  a  reasonable  timeframe.   I
         reach this conclusion for the following reasons;  it  has  been  14
         years since the appellant left Baghdad and he does not know  anyone
         there.  I work on the assumption that there is no family there as I
         have not been told there are any.  It is highly unlikely that there
         will be anyone who can vouch for the appellant as to his  identity.
         He has no identity documents, no  birth  certificate  or  documents
         relating to his parents by which he could try to establish  to  the
         authorities who he is".

36. I accept Mr Mills' submission that the judge has, in  effect,  reversed
    the burden of proof.  That is clear from the sentence where he says: "I
    work on the assumption that there is no family there as I have not been
    told there are any".

37. It was the appellant's case that his father had been killed when he was
    1 or 2 years old and that his mother had moved to Morocco  -  which  is
    where the appellant  moved  to  when  he  was  6  years  old.   If  the
    appellant's case was that he had no family in Baghdad  to  provide  him
    with temporary support and to assist him in obtaining a CSID, the judge
    could not assume that was true.  Neither  common-sense,  as  Ms  Sharma
    submitted, nor any findings by Judge Osborne  in  the  earlier  appeal,
    demanded such a finding.   The judge had to make a finding  on  whether
    he believed the appellant's account.  It was not for the  Secretary  of
    State to prove that he  had  family  in  Baghdad  but  rather  for  the
    appellant to  prove  that  he  had  no  family,  a  fact  which  would,
    undoubtedly, have assisted him in establishing he  would  be  destitute
    and at risk of Art 3 ill-treatment following AA (Iraq).   As  Mr  Mills
    pointed out, at para 30 the judge found that  the  appellant's  account
    that he had converted to Judaism and was bisexual was "not  true".   He
    had, therefore, made a finding- in what might be considered  a  central
    part of his international protection claim up to the beginning  of  the
    hearing - that he had lied.  Of  course,  a  judge  may  find  that  an
    individual has lied in one respect  of  his  account  but  nevertheless
    accept other aspects of his account as true.  However, in doing so  the
    judge must take into account that the  individual  has  lied  about  an
    important part of his claim and give reasons for any  finding  (whether
    positively or negatively) on the  other  aspects  of  his  claim,  here
    whether or not he had any family in  Baghdad.   As  the  Supreme  Court
    pointed out in MA (Somalia) it is properly open to a Tribunal to make a
    finding that an individual has simply failed to establish (even on  the
    lower standard of proof) the other  matters  when  he  has  lied  about
    aspects of his claim.   Here,  the  judge  has  not,  in  my  judgment,
    grappled with his previous finding that the appellant has lied and  how
    that, if at all, impacts upon whether he is to be  believed  about  his
    circumstances on return to Baghdad.

38. For those reasons, the judge's findings in para 44  which  led  him  to
    conclude, applying the Court of Appeal's decision in  AA  (Iraq),  that
    the appellant would be at risk of treatment contrary to Art 3 on return
    to Baghdad is flawed and cannot stand.

39. Consequently, the judge's decision to allow  the  appeal  cannot  stand
    either.

40. I need say no more about the judge's failure to make  any  findings  in
    respect of Art 8.  That is, at least in part, understandable given that
    he found in the appellant's favour under  Art  3.   In  one  sense,  of
    course, that latter finding ipso facto would lead to a finding  that  a
    breach of Art 8 had been established.  Of course, the appellant's claim
    under  Art  8  in  this  appeal  was  based,  not  centrally  upon  his
    circumstances on return to Baghdad, but rather upon the impact upon his
    relationship with his partner in the UK and her child.  Section  86  of
    the NIA Act 2002 did require the judge to determine the Art 8 claim  as
    a "matter raised as a ground of appeal".   As  Mr  Mills  acknowledged,
    that failure was not material to the outcome of the appeal so  long  as
    the Art 3 decision stood.  I have set that decision aside and,  as  the
    proper disposal of this  appeal  is  to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing, the issue of whether the appellant's removal
    would breach Art 8 will be one upon which he can rely again before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

41. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

42. The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  re-hearing
    before a judge other than Judge I D Boyes.

43. I see no reason why the judge's finding in relation to the  appellant's
    asylum claim (which he did not pursue before Judge Boyes) should not be
    preserved.  All other findings will not be preserved.   To  the  extent
    that the appellant continues to rely upon them, the First-tier Tribunal
    should re-make the decision in relation to  subsidiary  protection  and
    Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              23, March 2018
