
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00074/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2 May 2018                       |On 10 May 2019                        |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                         Appellant
                                    -and-
                                    AMS-A
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)

                                               Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:              Mr. T. Lindsey, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:                  Mr. E. Fripp of counsel, instructed by
Duncan Lewis & Co                  Solicitors (Harrow)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL










1.   The Respondent is a national of Somalia who was born in Kismayo and  is
    from the Ashraf clan. He arrived in the United Kingdom on  3  September
    2003 and applied for asylum on 9 September 2003.  His  application  was
    refused and he appealed. His appeal was allowed on 12 February 2004 and
    on 7 April 2004 he was granted indefinite leave to remain as a refugee.



2.    On 12 May 2016 the Respondent was convicted of one  count  of  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm and one count of breaching a bail  order
    by failing to surrender to custody and sentenced to 1 year, six  months
    and 28 days imprisonment.  As a consequence, on 23  May  2016,  he  was
    informed that he had  become  liable  to  automatic  deportation  under
    section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007.  He  did  not  respond  and
    therefore a deportation order was signed on 12 April 2018.

3.   On 13 April 2018 the Appellant informed the Appellant that he  did  not
    have the right to appeal against the decision to deport him but that he
    may appeal against the decision to refuse his human rights claim, which
    had been deemed to have been made from the information already known to
    the Secretary of State. Attached to this decision, which was served  on
    16 April 2018, there was also a decision revoking his  refugee  status,
    which had been dated 10 August 2017.  The  Respondent  appealed  on  27
    April 2018 on the basis that he would face persecution as a  member  of
    the Ashraf clan if deported to  Somalia  and  that  his  removal  would
    breach his human rights.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain allowed the Respondent's appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 9 January 2019. The Secretary of State appealed
    and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey granted him permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal on 21 March 2019.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   Counsel for the Respondent accepted that there was an error of  law  in
    the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain  but  submitted  that
    the error was not a material one.  The Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the error was material and that the decision  could  not
    be maintained. At the end of the hearing, the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer also undertook to find a copy of the determination, promulgated
    on 12 February 2004, which allowed the Respondent's asylum  appeal  and
    led to him being granted refugee status on 7 April 2004, and  serve  it
    on the Respondent's solicitors and the First-tier Tribunal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   The Respondent had a right to appeal under section 82 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision to
    revoke his refugee status and the decision to refuse his deemed human
    rights claim. He appealed on the basis that he was still entitled to
    refugee status or Humanitarian Protection and that returning him to
    Somalia would breach his rights under the European Convention on Human
    Rights. At the hearing, the Respondent did not rely on any rights under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

7.   At paragraph 39 of his decision, when considering whether the
    Respondent continued to be entitled to refugee status, First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain relied on MS (Art 1C (5)- Mogadishu) Somalia
    [2018] UKUT 00196 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal's headnote stated
    that:
         "The Secretary of State is not entitled to cease a person's refugee
         status pursuant to Article 1C (5) of the Refugee Convention solely
         on the basis of a change of circumstances in one part of the
         country of proposed return".


8.   This finding relied in part on paragraph 54 of the decision which
    stated:
         "Although it was suggested on behalf of the respondent in
         submissions that there was no difference in principle between the
         grant or the cessation of refugee status, because a person is only
         a refugee so long as there is no safe area of return, I do not
         agree. There is, in my judgement, a very significant philosophical
         and indeed practical   difference between the grant and the
         cessation of refugee status..."


9.   Both parties agreed that these findings conflict with the higher
    authority to be found in Secretary of State for the Home Department v
    MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994, where Lady Justice Arden stated that:
         "A cessation decision is the mirror image of a decision determining
         refugee status.  By that I mean that the grounds for cessation do
         not go beyond verifying whether the grounds for recognition of
         refugee status continue to exist.  Thus, the relevant question is
         whether there has been a significant and non-temporary change in
         circumstances so that the circumstances which caused the person to
         be a refugee have ceased to apply and there is no other basis on
         which he would be held to be a refugee.  The recognising state does
         not in addition have to be satisfied that the country of origin has
         a system of government or an effective legal system for protecting
         basic human rights, though the absence of such systems may of
         course lead to the conclusion that a significant and non-temporary
         change in circumstances has not occurred".


10.  I note that this reflects the wording of Article 1C (5) of the Refugee
    Convention which states that the Convention shall cease to apply to any
    person falling under the terms of Article 1(A) if:
         "He can no longer, because the circumstances in connexion with
         which he has been recognised as a refugee have ceased to exist,
         continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection of the
         country of his nationality".


11.  Paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules also states that:
         "A person's grant of asylum under paragraph 334 will be revoked or
         not renewed if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
         (v)  he can not longer, because the circumstances in connection
             with which they have been recognised as a refugee has ceased
             to exist, continue to refuse to avail themselves of the
             protection of the country of nationality".


12.  In addition, paragraph 339A of the Rules states that:
         "In considering (v) and (vi), the Secretary of State shall have
         regard to whether the change of circumstances is of such a
         significant and non-temporary nature that the refugee's fear of
         persecution can no longer be regarded as well-founded".


13,  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain did
    err in law in so far as he relied upon MS.

14.  Counsel for the Respondent submitted that this did not amount to a
    material error of law as the facts of the case indicated that the
    Respondent was still entitled to Refugee Protection if the country
    guidance in MOJ & Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT
    00442 (IAC) was correctly applied.

15.  This guidance indicates that:
    "(vii)   A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence will
         look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,  for
         assistance in re-establishing himself and  securing  a  livelihood.
         Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his clan  members
         who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is  only  likely  to  be
         forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans  may  have
         little to offer.
    (viii)   The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has  changed.
         Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
         assist with access to livelihoods, performing less of a  protection
         function than previously. There are no clan militias in  Mogadishu,
         no clan violence, and no clan based discriminatory treatment,  even
         for minority clan members.
    (ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu after
         a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the
         city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will
         need to be a careful assessment of all of the circumstances.  These
         considerations will include, but are not limited to:
           . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
           . length of absence from Mogadishu;
           . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
           . access to financial resources;
           . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
             or self employment;
           . availability of remittances from abroad;
           . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
           . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
             enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.
    (x)  Put another way, it will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
         explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access   the   economic
         opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
         especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are
         taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.
    (xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family  support
         who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who  have
         no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on  return  who
         will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling  below
         that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.
    (xii)  The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply  those  who
         originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live  in
         the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing
         a real risk of  destitution.  On  the  other  hand,  relocation  in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no former links  to
         the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards.

16.  However, although the decision indicates that some evidence had been
    led at the hearing which related to this guidance and the potential
    applicability of it to the Respondent, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hussain did not reach any findings as to its applicability. In my view,
    this amounted to a further error of law which was Robinson obvious. In
    addition, in order to find that the error of law referred to above was
    not material, I would have had to speculate about what findings of fact
    would have been made if the country guidance had been applied. This
    would not have been a suitable approach to the issue of materiality.

17.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain also failed to take into account
    that, at paragraphs 6 to 8 of the decision under challenge, the
    Secretary of State also concluded that it would be safe for the
    Respondent to return to Kismayo. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain did
    not address this finding or indicate any basis upon which he found that
    this was not the case. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that there
    was recent objective evidence which indicated that it was only the
    central part of Kismayo that was safe and that the road to the airport
    was vulnerable to attacks by Al-Shabaab.  However, this evidence was
    simply not addressed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain and I am not
    able to speculate as to what findings of fact he would have made if he
    had considered it.

18.  For all of these reasons there were errors of law in First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain's decision.

Decision

(1)  The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain, Landes or Davey.

Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 8 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


