
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00125/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2020                     |On 24 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     hk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Selway, Brar and Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1996  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Afghanistan. By decision promulgated on 22 October 2019, the First-tier
    Tribunal allowed the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  him  international  protection.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal. The judge found that the appellant  is
    a homosexual who would conceal his  sexual  orientation  on  return  to
    Afghanistan for fear of being persecuted (see  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC
    31). The first ground of appeal records that the judge, whilst  he  had
    regard to a revocation of deportation decision letter dated 5 June 2018
    and reasons for refusal letter dated 7 August 2018, failed properly  to
    have regard to a subsequent  supplementary  decision  letter  from  the
    Secretary of State dated 15 November 2018. Accordingly, the  judge  had
    proceeded  with  the  hearing  on  the  basis  that   the   appellant's
    homosexuality was accepted by the Secretary  of  State  as  a  fact,  a
    concession which the grounds argue had been withdrawn in  the  November
    2018 letter. The grounds assert that the letter  of  15  November  2018
    clearly indicated that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claimed sexuality.

 3. At the initial hearing at the Upper Tribunal, the advocates and I spent
    some considerable time trying to locate a copy  of  the  letter  of  15
    November 2018. I am grateful  to  Mr  Diwnycz,  who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State, for finding a copy of the letter  in  his  computer
    records. He sent by email a copy of the letter  to  myself  and  to  Mr
    Selway,  who  appeared  for   the   appellant;   extraordinarily,   the
    appellant's representatives had never seen a copy of the letter  before
    today.

 4. I find that there has been no procedural impropriety on the part of the
    First-tier Tribunal. First, Judge  Cope,  in  an  exhaustive  analysis,
    clearly states that he came across the November 2018  letter  following
    the hearing and whilst he was preparing his decision  for  promulgation
    [102]. Both parties accept that the judge is correct to  say  that  the
    letter of 15 November 2018 had never been referred to in  any  previous
    proceedings (there had been an earlier hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the decision set  aside  upon  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal). Most significantly, Mr Tuff, who appeared for the  Secretary
    of State before Judge Cope, had  explicitly  relied  upon  the  earlier
    decision letters of June and August 2018 and had made no mention of the
    November letter [113]. It was entirely  reasonable  for  the  judge  to
    assume that the presenting officer had been aware of the  later  letter
    at the time of the hearing given that it had had emanated from his  own
    department and that he chose not to place reliance upon  it.  Moreover,
    as the judge recorded at [105], the November  2018  letter  'implicitly
    accepts that the appellant is gay'; I agree that paragraphs 40 and  101
    - 102 implicitly accept the appellant's sexual orientation as  claimed.
    Secondly, at [191], the judge makes the unequivocal  finding  that,  on
    the basis of the evidence  before  him,  the  appellant  is  gay.  Even
    assuming that the judge  had  not  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State had agreed that the appellant is homosexual,  it  is
    abundantly clear that the judge, assessing the  evidence  holistically,
    reached independently the conclusion that the  appellant  is  gay.  Any
    possible error on the part of the judge, therefore, is, in the light of
    that finding, immaterial.

 5. The second ground of appeal complains that the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant would conceal his  sexuality  on  return  to  Afghanistan  on
    account of a fear of persecution or ill-treatment without having  heard
    evidence from the appellant 'expressly saying' that he would change his
    behaviour for that reason. This ground  of  appeal  is  without  merit.
    First, the disputed November 2018  decision  letter  explicitly  states
    that, if the appellant is found to be gay, then he would not be able to
    live openly as a gay man in Afghanistan for fear of persecution or ill-
    treatment. Secondly, the judge's conclusion did  not  depend  upon  the
    appellant explicitly stating that  he  is  homosexual;  the  judge  has
    reached his finding following his own objective assessment of  all  the
    evidence and the application of  relevant  law.  Thirdly,  the  grounds
    overlook the fact the appellant had stated  an  interview  (Q18)  that,
    being a gay man, he feared returning to Afghanistan because he believed
    he would be persecuted there. Contrary  to  what  is  asserted  in  the
    grounds, the appellant had expressly stated that he feared  persecution
    on return on account of his sexuality.

 6. In the light of what I say above, I find that the Secretary of  State's
    appeal is dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                           Date 13 March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

