
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00099/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 August 2019                    |On 18 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     L T
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Waheed, instructed by Freemans Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal
against the decision of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who allowed the
appeal of Mr [T] against a decision of the Secretary of State of 17 May
2018 refusing his asylum and protection claim.

2.   Mr [T], to whom I shall refer hereafter as the appellant as that was
his status before the First-tier Tribunal, entered the United Kingdom in
2007 and made an application for asylum.  His application was refused, but
he was successful in an appeal before an Immigration Judge and was
subsequently granted refugee status in the United Kingdom on 18 September
2007, and on 30 January 2013 he was granted indefinite leave to remain in
the United Kingdom.

3.   On 9 June 2016 at Isleworth Crown Court the appellant was convicted of
the offence of "dishonestly making representations to make gain for
self/another or cause loss to other/expose other to risk".  He was
sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment and is therefore a foreign
criminal who faces automatic deportation.  He was subsequently notified by
the respondent on 13 July 2016 that it had been decided that a deportation
order would be made against him.  He made representations but it was
decided that he should be deported.  He was notified on 10 November 2016 of
the respondent's intention to cease his refugee status and made
representations.

4.   The judge noted at paragraph 4 of his decision that before taking any
action on deportation the Secretary of State is obliged to review the
appellant's current refugee status, observing that he cannot be deported if
his appeal against revocation is upheld and that the decision is based
entirely upon whether the appellant's particular circumstances or those of
his country of origin have changed so that international protection is no
longer a requirement.

5.   The judge was satisfied that there had been material changes in the
factual situation, noting the country guidance in CM [2013] 00059 and took
into account that there was significantly less politically motived violence
in Zimbabwe compared with the situation considered by the AIT in RN, the
earlier country guidance.  The judge noted that in particular the evidence
did not show that as a general matter the return of a failed asylum seeker
from the United Kingdom having no significant MDC profile would result in
that person facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF.

6.   The judge noted that the most significant change in Zimbabwe was the
removal of Robert Mugabe and the inauguration of Emmerson Mnangagwa as
President.  The judge noted the background evidence including the Country
Policy and Information Note (CPIN) of February 2019, which among other
things said, at paragraph 2.4.13, that:

"Though the political landscape has remained relatively stable since CM and
EM were promulgated, largely as a result of the threat posed by the state
security apparatus and relative weakness of opposition groups, there is a
lack of clear and cogent evidence that the government has, in practice,
fundamentally changed the political environment or how it treats those
opposed to the state."

7.   The judge noted what was said at paragraph 339A of HC 395 with regard
to cases where the respondent seeks the revocation of an appellant's
refugee status.  This includes at (v) when "they can no longer, because the
circumstances in connection with which they have been recognised as a
refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to avail themselves of the
protection of the country of nationality".  It is also said at 339A that
"in considering (v) and (vi), the Secretary of State shall have regard to
whether the change of circumstances is of such a significant and non-
temporary nature that the refugee's fear of persecution can no longer be
regarded as well-founded".

8.   The judge went on to say that he was not satisfied that circumstances
had changed in Zimbabwe so fundamentally that any fear of persecution or
other harm that the appellant might have could no longer be regarded as
well-founded or have ceased to exist.  On his assessment of the evidence,
the situation in Zimbabwe was extremely volatile especially when there were
elections as there were in this case such that the appellant's fear of
persecution or serious harm could still be regarded as well-founded.  He
was not satisfied that the circumstances that the respondent relied upon
could be described as significant and non-temporary in nature with regard
to a positive change of circumstances.  The expression "significant and non-
temporary" applied to the state apparatus in Zimbabwe.  If the
circumstances under which the appellant became a refugee might have changed
they most certainly had not ceased to exist to the extent that the
appellant could return without difficulty to the country of former habitual
residence.  The burden of proof imposed on the respondent by paragraph 339A
had not been discharged and consequently the appeal was allowed on asylum
grounds.

9.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal this decision,
arguing that the judge had not properly applied the guidance in MA
(Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994 and that in light of the findings as to the
judge's profile by the previous judge, he would not face a real risk on
return.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

10.  In her submissions Ms Everett relied on the grounds.  Paragraph 9 of
the judge's decision was flawed.  The appellant was capable of moving to an
alternative place or the country conditions were so changed that a judge
would be bound to find in the Secretary of State's favour.

11.  In his submissions Mr Waheed relied on the Rule 24 response and his
skeleton argument.  He referred to the judge's quotation from the Secretary
of State's CPIN and that made clear what the position was and why the
judge's decision was correct.  Following the inauguration of the new
President there was a crackdown on opposition leaders and supporters and
supporters were abducted and attacked and threatened.  There was nothing in
the CPIN limiting this activity to certain areas and that had not been
argued on behalf of the Secretary of State.  It was open to the judge to
see this as countrywide.  The grounds in the Reasons for Cessation letter
ignored the appellant's particular circumstances and it was necessary to
bear in mind from 2007 that he had not even been able to escape the
Zimbabwean authorities on relocation to South Africa.  The judge had noted
the findings of the previous judge.  The country guidance relied on by the
Secretary of State dealt in generalities and the judge had taken into
account the actual circumstances of the asylum seeker and the fact that he
was not able to effect internal relocation.  Paragraph 46 of the decision
of the Court of Appeal in MS (Somalia) [2019] EWCA Civ 1345 was relevant
with regard to the mirror image approach to be adopted.  Paragraph 48 was
also relevant.  It was necessary to show that the change in circumstances
was fundamental and durable.  The judge had properly directed himself.  The
burden of proof had not been discharged by the Secretary of State.

12.  Ms Everett had no further points to make by way of reply.

13.  I reserved my determination.

14.  I am satisfied that there is no error of law in the judge's decision
in this case.  Understandably, he focused on what had been said in the
Secretary of State's own evidence in the form of paragraph 2.4.13 of the
CPIN that I have quoted above.  Though he was satisfied that material
changes in the factual situation had taken place and that there was
significantly less politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe compared to
the situation considered by the AIT at the time of RN, however, he noted
that in effect things had not changed to the extent that the Secretary of
State had discharged the burden of proof on her.  It was necessary for her
to show that the change of circumstances was of such a significant and non-
temporary nature that the refugee's fear of persecution can no longer be
regarded as well-founded.  It was fully open to the judge to find that the
Secretary of State had not discharged her burden in that regard, bearing in
mind the evidence considered, including the Secretary of State's own
Country Policy and Information Note of February 2019.  Accordingly, I find
no error of law in the judge's decision, and that decision allowing the
appeal therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date 4 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
