
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00016/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th November 2017                    |On 29th November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                    [N A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Daley, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Kenya  (born  [  ]  1980)  appeals  with
    permission against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal dismissing her
    appeal against the Respondent's decision of 21st January 2017  revoking
    her refugee status.  The revocation was made  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had obtained refugee status by deception.





Background

 2. The Appellant claims to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  2008.
    She made a claim to asylum using a false identity.  She said she was  a
    Somalian citizen who was a member of the Bajuni clan  and  further  was
    someone who had been trafficked to the UK.

 3. The Respondent disbelieved that she was a Somali national on the  basis
    that she displayed a lack of knowledge of her claimed  home  town,  did
    not speak Bajuni and instead spoke Swahili.  The Respondent formed  the
    view  that  the  Appellant  was  a  Kenyan  citizen   and   accordingly
    disbelieved her core claim to be at risk in Somalia.

 4. The Appellant appealed  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  After considering the evidence  before  it,  the  FtT  in  a
    decision promulgated on 26th July 2010, accepted that the Appellant was
    a Somalian national who was a member of the Bajuni  clan.   Accordingly
    on the basis of those findings the Appellant's appeal  for  asylum  was
    successful and the Respondent granted her refugee status.

 5. After being recognised as a refugee the Appellant moved into a  Housing
    Association property in Leeds and  started  attending  university.   At
    university she began a relationship with [DM] who is a British citizen.
     They married in 2013.

 6. In  2014,  the  Appellant  through  her  representatives  informed  the
    Respondent that the basis of her claim  to  asylum  made  in  2008  was
    untrue.  She was not a national of Somalia and she  had  used  a  false
    name and nationality in order to claim refugee  status.   She  admitted
    that she is a Kenyan national.  The  Appellant's  reasons  for  putting
    forward  a  false  claim  were  set  out  in  the   letter   from   her
    representatives.  That letter also set out that the  Appellant  is  now
    married  to  a  British  national  and  therefore  any  removal   would
    contravene her Article 8 ECHR rights.

 7. The Appellant also maintained that she was the victim  of  trafficking.
    It is correct that on the basis of this claim  she  was  treated  as  a
    potential victim of human trafficking and a referral was  made  by  the
    Respondent to the National Referral Mechanism (NRM). Investigations are
    ongoing into that aspect of her claim and therefore no decision has yet
    been made on whether the Respondent accepts the claim.

 8. After consideration of the Appellant's representations, the  Respondent
    made a decision to revoke the Appellant's refugee  status.   The  UNHCR
    were made aware of the decision to revoke.  The Appellant appealed  the
    revocation decision to the FtT and it is that appeal  which  forms  the
    basis of the present matter before me.

FtT Hearing

 9. In a full decision, the FtT set out the evidence  before  it  including
    the oral evidence of the Appellant, her husband and two witnesses.   It
    was pointed out to the FtT at the hearing, that the NRM had as yet made
    no decision following the referral made to it.

10. Nevertheless the judge proceeded forming the view that what was  before
    him was a Revocation decision, and that the evidence showed that  there
    was no risk to the Appellant on  return  to  Kenya.  He  dismissed  the
    appeal.

11.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  one  ground  only.
    Permission was granted and the relevant part of the grant of permission
    reads as follows

         "It is arguable with  reference  to  MS  (Trafficking  -  Tribunals
         Powers - Article 4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 226, that  the  Judge
         erred in  law  in  dismissing  the  appeal  when  the  Respondent's
         decision to revoke the refugee status  was  unlawful  in  that  the
         revocation decision was made without the Respondent  following  her
         own policy in Section 3.5 and 3.11 of the Asylum Policy Instruction
         regarding revocation and  the  Competent  Authority  Guidance.   In
         particular, the decision to revoke the Appellant's  refugee  status
         was made when the Competent Authority's Conclusive Grounds decision
         remained outstanding and  the  Competent  Authority's  process  was
         ongoing - this situation was noted by the Judge in the decision [at
         23(b) and at 31]."

12. Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether the FtT's decision
    discloses an error of law requiring it to be set  aside  on  the  basis
    that the Secretary of State's decision was unlawful.

UT Hearing

13. Before me Mr Medley-Daley appeared for the Appellant, Mrs Pettersen for
    the Respondent.  Mr Medley-Daley in his submission kept to the  grounds
    seeking permission and submitted that the issue before me was a  narrow
    one, namely whether the Respondent had acted unlawfully  by  proceeding
    to make her decision to revoke the Appellant's  refugee  status  before
    the  conclusion  of  the  NRM  investigation.  This  he  said  was   in
    contravention of the terms of her own published policy.

14. He referred me to the Respondent's policy which  is  contained  in  the
    documents before me and entitled Victims of Modern Slavery -  Competent
    Authority Guidance.  He asked me to look particularly at  Sections  3.5
    and 3.11 of that document.  He submitted that the Secretary of  State's
    decision to revoke the Appellant's refugee status was made prematurely.
     There was sufficient evidence before the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Appellant to be referred to the NRM.  It was therefore perverse for the
    Secretary of State to make her decision before the  investigation  into
    the potential victim of trafficking  had  been  concluded.   Until  the
    decision from the NRM was concluded and considered,  the  Secretary  of
    State could not be said to be in a position to make  a  fully  informed
    decision.  This resulted in unfairness to the Appellant.

15. The Respondent had served  a  Rule  24  response  defending  the  FtT's
    decision.  Whilst not conceding the point in issue, Mrs Pettersen  said
    that she took  on  board  the  point  that  there  could  be  perceived
    unfairness to  the  Appellant  in  that  there  was  possible  relevant
    information  which  had  not  been  factored  into   the   Respondent's
    consideration.

Consideration

16. I find force in Mr Medley-Daley's  contention  that  the  Secretary  of
    State has made her decision prematurely and made it without  regard  to
    her own published policy.  The investigation into whether  or  not  the
    Appellant has been a victim of trafficking is ongoing.  It is not known
    what the result of that investigation will  be.   However  there  is  a
    possibility that  the  Appellant  may  be  found  to  be  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  If she is a victim of  trafficking  that  in  turn  could
    impact upon whether or not there is a credible risk on  return,  should
    she be returned to Kenya.  It is proper that the Appellant is given the
    opportunity of having the Conclusive Grounds  Decision,  factored  into
    any consideration that may result in a decision to revoke  her  refugee
    status.

17. The Respondent's own policy sets out at 3.5 and 3.11 that this  is  the
    proper way to proceed with Refugee Convention cases.

18. I find that the Secretary of State has not proceeded in this manner and
    accordingly I find that by not following her own policy,  the  decision
    of the Respondent is rendered unlawful.

19. It follows therefore that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    proceed in dismissing the Appellant's appeal  must  be  set  aside  for
    legal error.  The decision is set aside in its entirety  and  therefore
    no findings of fact are preserved.

20. The position now is that it will be incumbent  upon  the  Secretary  of
    State to make a fresh decision, in accordance with her policy  for  the
    consideration of asylum claims from potential victims  of  trafficking.
    Clearly this will require the NRM investigation to be concluded and for
    any fresh decision to be made in the light of this.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made. Anonymity was not requested.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     29 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

