
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
RP/00031/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2017                       |On 30 October 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     MH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms Bayoumi, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the Respondent and to the Appellant.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is brought by the Secretary  of  State
    who was the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal. However, for ease of
    reference, we refer to the parties as they were known in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Somalia born  in  1964,  and  so  53
    years old.  Having entered the UK illegally he was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain as a refugee in September 2001. On 1 August 2013 he was
    sentenced at Cardiff Crown Court having been found unfit to plead, on a
    charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm,  to  be  detained  in
    hospital under section 37/41 of the Mental  Health  Act  1983,  without
    time  limit.  Subsequently  he  was  discharged  into  the   community,
    initially on conditions but absolutely in November 2016. At that  time,
    it was found not be in the public  interest  to  reinstate  proceedings
    against him.

 3. On 17 September 2015, the respondent notified the  appellant  that  she
    was proposing to deport him under section 5 (1) of the Immigration  Act
    1971 having concluded that his presence in the UK is not  conducive  to
    the public good, and that to remove him  would  not  breach  his  human
    rights under article 3 or 8 ECHR. On 29 October  2015,  the  respondent
    told the appellant she was intending to cease his refugee status on the
    basis of his conviction for  a  particularly  serious  crime  with  his
    continued presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  being  a  danger  to  the
    community,  and  a  durable  change  in  the  country  conditions.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  respondent  conceded
    that it was not open to her to argue  that  the  matter  of  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection were precluded by a criminal conviction  giving
    rise to a sentence of imprisonment of at  least  2  years  because  the
    indefinite hospital order imposed was not a period of imprisonment. For
    the same reasons, the appellant was  not  a  foreign  criminal  in  the
    context of section 117C of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 Part 5.  The  judge  assessed  the  merits  of  the  international
    protection claim. In those circumstances, the judge assessed the merits
    of the decision to cease the appellant's refugee  status  and  risk  on
    return currently.

 5. The judge noted that the respondent had previously concluded  that  the
    appellant was at risk in his home area of Afgoye. The country  evidence
    showed that whilst other areas of the country may be safe for returnees
    there was nothing to show that Afgoye was not still in the clutches  of
    Al- Shabab. In assessing relocation to Mogadishu, the judge noted  that
    the appellant was a minority clan member  who  would  be  returning  to
    Mogadishu. The judge noted the  country  guidance  in  MOJ  and  others
    (return to Mogadishu) (CG) [2014] UKUT 00442 to the point that minority
    clan members could not ordinarily expect relevant or support from their
    clan in Mogadishu,  that  the  appellant  would  be  returning  without
    nuclear family or close relatives in the city to assist  him,  that  he
    had never previously lived in Mogadishu. His parents had been killed in
    Somalia. He had managed to be reunited with his wife  and  children  in
    Wales but they were now separated because  of  his  mental  illness  of
    schizophrenia. There was no evidence  of  any  family  here  who  could
    support him in Somalia. The judge concluded he would have no choice but
    to live in an IDP camp.

 6. The judge noted the respondent's country information to the point  that
    minority clan members, whilst not at risk any longer in the context  of
    a return to Mogadishu, are likely to be so if they have to go to an IDP
    camp. In an IDP camp the evidence is  that    they  would  likely  face
    discrimination and various  human  rights  abuses,  including  economic
    exploitation, extortion, forced labour and forced evictions,  amounting
    to  persecution  and  treatment  contrary  to  article  3.   In   those
    circumstances, the judge concluded, the appellant would not only be  at
    risk of persecution in his home area, expecting him to relocate  to  an
    IDP camp  would  also  expose  him  to  persecution  and  ill-treatment
    contrary to article 3, and that would be unduly harsh.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. On 27 July 2017, the Secretary  of  State  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal by the First-tier Tribunal, it being found that  the  judge  had
    arguably failed to take account of material evidence when deciding that
    Mogadishu was not a viable internal relocation option.

 8. Before us, Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State,  relied
    upon without elaboration the Grounds of Appeal. In  summary,  they  are
    that the judge erred in law in finding that  the  appellant  could  not
    successfully relocate to Mogadishu because:

      a) he arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of 37, so that he would
         still be familiar with the language culture etc,

      b) the judge did not  explain  why  he  could  not  benefit  from  the
         economic boom in Mogadishu given that he had had  employment  as  a
         chef and so had a  transferable  skill,  could  expect  to  receive
         preference as Western returnees,  who  employers  viewed  as  being
         better educated and more resourceful than citizens who had remained
         in Mogadishu throughout

      c) the country guidance was that the fact that a  returnee  had  never
         lived in Mogadishu was not a determinative factor.

      d) The judge too readily accepted the  appellant's  evidence  that  he
         would  have  a  lack  of  support  in  light  of  the  evidence  of
         remittances from abroad there was an absence of reasoning as to why
         the appellant's family  in  the  United  Kingdom  could  not  offer
         financial assistance until he was  able  to  establish  himself  in
         Mogadishu.

 9. Ms Bayoumi submitted  that  the  judge  had  correctly  identified  the
    country  guidance  and  applied  it  appropriately  to  the   appellant
    circumstances.  The  judge  had  reached  conclusions  based   on   the
    unchallenged evidence that the appellant, irrespective of the  previous
    history of work, had been unable to sustain that position  and  was  in
    receipt of benefits. The Home Office had questioned him as to  when  he
    had last worked and did not challenge his evidence that it was 4  years
    ago and it was not suggested in submissions that he should be  able  to
    support himself through employment. In respect of  his  family  members
    his evidence had been that the family with whom he was in contact  were
    his children and the evidence did not show that they were in a position
    to send remittances abroad. It was not to put to him that he was  still
    in contact with his brother or that his brother would be able to  remit
    funds to him, and that argument was not relied upon in submissions. The
    judge had done sufficient to provide reasoning for  the  cases  it  was
    argued before her.

Discussion

10. The structure of the judge's decision was not assisted  by  the  muddle
    presented by  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  which  is  not  only
    incorrect in terms of the import of  the  appellant's  conviction,  the
    lack of a term of imprisonment, treats the appellant as a  resident  of
    Mogadishu and  fails  to  address  the  issue  of  persecution  in  the
    appellant's home area. So  far  as  Mogadishu  is  concerned  the  only
    relevant question is the substance of the relocation  issue,  involving
    both the safety of return and the question of whether or not  it  would
    be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to go  there.  The  reality  is
    that the judge has provided adequate reasons in respect of  identifying
    that the appellant would be at risk in his home area, and that it would
    be unduly harsh in the context of international  protection  principles
    to return him to Mogadishu. The conclusion that the appellant would  be
    likely to find himself in  an  IDP  camp  is  in  accordance  with  the
    approach of the country guidance case, as are the conclusions  that  he
    would be at risk of persecution therein, and be at risk  of  Article  3
    treatment.

11. The matters that the  respondent  relies  on  in  her  grounds,  whilst
    clearly being a disagreement with the judge's  conclusions,  have  been
    considered  by  the  judge  at  some   length   when,   at   paragraphs
    23,24,26,28,29 and 31, she makes her findings as to the appellant never
    having lived in Mogadishu, his minority clan affiliation,  and  in  the
    context of the arguments as they were put on the day, that he would  be
    unable to access funds, family or social support. Whilst the  appellant
    may have been cross-examined on having no family support  in  light  of
    the fact that he had a brother who had helped him 4  years  previously,
    as well as his evidence of his children's economic position,  that  did
    not happen. The HOPO on the day had the benefit of seeing  and  hearing
    the appellant give his evidence.  The judge was entitled to  deal  with
    the case on the basis upon which it was argued.

Decision.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals no error of law for the
    reasons set out above. The decision to allow the appeal stands.





Signed            E. Davidge            Date 24 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
