
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00021/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 August 2020                            |On 7 September 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Kaftar Rahmani
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, instructed by Times PBS Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal
against the decision of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who allowed the
appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 18 January
2018 refusing to revoke protection status and refusing a human rights
claim.

2.   I shall refer hereafter to Mr Rahmani as the appellant, as he was
before the judge and to the Secretary of State as the respondent, as she
was before the judge.

3.   In the event, little needs to be said about this appeal.  It is common
ground before me that the judge's decision was fundamentally flawed and
needs to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.  The points set out in the
grounds are well-made.  As is pointed out at paragraph 4 of the grounds, it
is clear that applying section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002 encompasses Article 33(2) of the Geneva Convention.  The
references by the First-tier Judge to "Article 15(c)" are clearly erroneous
and as the grounds surmise may have been intended to refer to Article 1(C)5
of the Refugee Convention.  As is pointed out, this is an issue addressed
in the refusal letter as also were Articles 3 and 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights, contrary to what appears to have been thought
by the judge.

4.   As a consequence, the decision will have to be remade on the basis as
summarised at paragraph 24 of the earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal
dated 18 December 2019.

5.   I should also observe for the sake of clarity and completeness that it
is accepted that, although there is some clear confusion in the judge's
decision in that although the decision was purportedly allowed making this
subject to a number of matters the respondent was directed to consider, I
do consider that the appeal was allowed rather than no decision having been
made and therefore no issue of jurisdiction arises.

6.   The appeal is therefore allowed to the extent set out above, to be
reheard in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House by a judge other than
Judge Lucas.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date 28 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

