
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00111/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th October 2020                 |On 29th October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     J A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M. Butler, instructed by David Wyld & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born in 1982. His appeal against
    the decision to revoke refugee status was allowed by of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Welsh on asylum and human rights grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed on the following grounds: The judge
    failed to apply the approach in MS (Somalia) [2019] EWCA Civ 1345,
    promulgated after the hearing. Following country guidance in MOJ
    (Somalia) CG [2014] UKUT, the Appellant was not at risk from Al-Shabaab
    or from his membership of a minority clan. The Appellant had failed to
    show he could not access the economic boom in Mogadishu and the judge
    failed to give reasons for finding the Appellant's family would not be
    able to assist him on return. Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman granted
    permission on 5 March 2020.

 3. It is not necessary to repeat the Appellant's immigration history or
    document what occurred in previous proceedings. The issue before the
    First-tier Tribunal was whether the circumstances in connection with
    which the Appellant had been granted refugee status ceased to exist.
    The relevant question was whether there had been a significant and non-
    temporary (fundamental and durable) change in circumstances, such that
    the Appellant's fear of persecution can no longer be regarded as well
    founded, and there was no other basis upon which the Appellant could be
    held to be a refugee.

 4. In summary, the judge found that there was not a fundamental and
    durable change in circumstances in the Appellant's home area of Brava.
    The Respondent's evidence was that the situation was improving. The
    Appellant was still at risk from Al-Shabaab because of his western
    appearance. In considering relocation to Mogadishu the Respondent had
    failed to demonstrate, in relation to this Appellant, that there had
    been a significant and non-temporary change in circumstances given the
    proximity to Brava and the risk to the Appellant travelling to and from
    Mogadishu. In the alternative, the judge found that the possibility of
    internal relocation was not a viable option following paragraphs 407
    and 408 of MOJ.

Submissions

5.   Mr Tufan relied on the skeleton argument dated 18 May 2020 and
submitted the judge had erred in law in applying the reasoning in AMA
(Article 1C(5) - proviso - internal relocation) Somalia [2019] UKUT
0011(IAC). The judge should have followed the approach in MS (Somalia),
which disapproved of the findings in MOJ in relation to Article 3.

6.   In SB (refugee revocation; IDP camps) Somalia [2019] UKUT 358 (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Court of Appeal has authoritatively decided that
refugee status can be revoked on the basis that the refugee now has the
ability to relocate internally within their country of nationality. Mr
Tufan relied on paragraph 75 of SB, which states:

         "In re-making the decision in relation to Article 3 and (if
         advanced by the claimant) Article 2 of the ECHR, the fact-finding
         tribunal will be required to have regard to the relevant country
         guidance, as described above and as authoritatively interpreted by
         the Court of Appeal in Said and MS (Somalia), in order to decide
         whether, if returned to Mogadishu, the claimant would face a real
         risk of Article 2/3 harm, having regard to the claimant's personal
         circumstances, but bearing in mind that (absent any significant
         change in the general situation in Mogadishu between now and then)
         an Article 3 claim advanced in respect of general living conditions
         (as opposed to risk as a "direct result of violent activities":
         paragraph 31 of Said) will need to meet the high test in D v United
         Kingdom and N v United Kingdom."

7.   Mr Tufan submitted that following Said, the Appellant's Article 3
rights would not be breached even if he went to an IDP camp in Mogadishu.
The humanitarian conditions were insufficient to breach Article 3. Mr Tufan
referred to paragraphs 74 to 76 of MS and submitted the judge had applied
the wrong legal test at [31].

8.   Ms Butler relied on her written submissions dated 20  May  2020  and  8
    October 2020. She submitted that Mr Tufan's argument on Article  3  was
    not raised in the  grounds  of  appeal.  In  applying  MOJ,  the  judge
    considered internal relocation and whether it was reasonably available.
    The judge did not rely on MOJ to support a breach  of  Article  3.  The
    judge looked at the factors relevant to assessing internal  relocation.
    Ms Butler submitted the primary findings at  [29]  and  [30]  were  not
    challenged. There was no sufficient durable change  and  the  Appellant
    would be at risk travelling from Mogadishu to Brava.

9.   When considering internal relocation,  it  was  necessary  to  consider
    return to  the  Appellant's  home  area,  Brava,  which  was  close  to
    Mogadishu. It was not possible to say the change in  circumstances  was
    sufficiently durable. It was reasonable for the judge to apply AMA  and
    MOJ. MS endorsed MA. The judge's primary finding  was  that  there  had
    been no sufficient durable change for Mogadishu to  be  safe  for  this
    Appellant. Any lack of reasoning in [31]  and  [32]  was  not  material
    because it was not reasonable for the Appellant to internally relocate.
    Mr Tufan did not address internal relocation.

10.  Mr Tufan submitted it was unreasonable to suggest  there  had  been  no
    durable change. There  was  a  material  misdirection  in  law  in  the
    decision. Following country guidance and Court of Appeal  authority  it
    was reasonable for the Appellant to internally relocate  to  Mogadishu.
    The judge's assessment of cessation of refugee status was  inconsistent
    with MA and MS. The judge had erred in law in misapplying case law. The
    decision was perverse and lacked reasons. The judge had failed to  make
    findings on Article 8 and therefore a re-hearing would be necessary.

Conclusions and reasons

11.  The judge adopted the approach in MA endorsed in MS (at paragraph  47):
    "A cessation decision is a  mirror  image  of  a  decision  determining
    refugee status." The judge first considered whether the Appellant could
    return to his home area, Brava. Her conclusion that the Respondent  had
    failed to show there had been a significant and non-temporary change in
    circumstances in Brava was open to her on the evidence before  her  and
    she gave adequate reasons for coming to that conclusion. There  was  no
    challenge to this finding in the grounds of appeal.

12.      Having found  that  the  Appellant  had  a  well  founded  fear  of
    persecution in Brava, which is 209km from  Mogadishu,  the  judge  then
    went on to consider relocation to Mogadishu.  The  Respondent  accepted
    there was a risk to those who are encountered by Al-Shabaab  travelling
    between Mogadishu and Brava who "are considered to  be  looking  a  bit
    westernised." The judge concluded the Appellant was such a  person.  He
    left Somalia when he was eight years old and he was now 36  years  old.
    The judge considered the particular circumstances  of  this  Appellant.
    This approach was  not  inconsistent  with  MS.  The  judge  considered
    whether it was appropriate to cease refugee status on the basis of  the
    situation in Mogadishu.

13.  The judge agreed with the analysis in AMA and concluded the  Respondent
    had been "unable to explain how, in the context of a  country  such  as
    Somalia, with a lengthy and fluid  history  of  complex  and  egregious
    persecution by various actors in the face of an either non-existent  or
    weak state apparatus, there can be the 'significant and  non-temporary'
    change in circumstances." This finding was open to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before her.

14.  In AMA, the Upper Tribunal found that changes in the refugee's  country
    of origin affecting only part of the country, may in principle, lead to
    cessation of refugee status provided that the protection  available  is
    sufficiently fundamental and durable  notwithstanding  the  absence  of
    this in other parts of the country. The  Court  of  Appeal  in  MS  had
    reservations  about  the  generalised  statements  made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AMA that it would be difficult, in practice, for  a  change
    in  circumstances  in  a  place  of  relocation  to   be   sufficiently
    fundamental and durable for there to be cessation.

15.  In the present case, the decision of MS post-dated the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and the judge was not referred to it  prior  to
    promulgating her decision. The decision of AMA was  not  overruled  and
    the judge was entitled to refer to it. She relied on it to support  her
    finding that there had not been a significant and non-temporary  change
    of circumstances for this Appellant in Mogadishu.

16.  The judge considered the particular  circumstances  of  this  Appellant
    and whether the possibility of relocation should lead to the  cessation
    of refugee status. This approach was consistent with MS. Her conclusion
    that the Respondent had failed to show there had been a fundamental and
    durable change in Mogadishu, such that this Appellant would  no  longer
    be at risk, was open to the judge on the evidence before her. The judge
    adopted a restrictive and well balanced approach. There was no error of
    law in the judge's decision that the Respondent had failed to show that
    the circumstances, which caused the Appellant to be a  refugee,  ceased
    to exist.

17.  The judge went on to consider whether it would be  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to relocate to Mogadishu, in the alternative.  There  was  no
    misapplication of country guidance and no  lack  of  reasoning  in  the
    judge's conclusions. Mr Tufan's argument in relation to Article  3  was
    not raised in the grounds, but it was not material in any event.

18.  There  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    Respondent had failed to show that  Mogadishu  was  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative for the Appellant. On the  facts  found  by  the
    judge, it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to  return  to
    Mogadishu because there was a real possibility that he  would  have  to
    live in  conditions  that  would  fall  below  acceptable  humanitarian
    standards.

19.  There was no error of law in the  decision  promulgated  on  12  August
    2019. The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 23 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



