

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
RP/00089/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Determination Promulgated      |
|On Friday 22 July 2016                    |  On Wednesday 27 July 2016      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR DAHIR MOHAMED AHMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K McCarthy, Counsel instructed by Scott Moncrieff
solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
        For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in
       the First-Tier Tribunal  albeit  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
       technically the Appellant in this particular appeal.  The  Secretary
       of State appeals against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge S J
       Clarke promulgated on 29 April 2016 ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
       Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  dated
       28 September 2015 refusing his human rights claim  and  ceasing  his
       refugee  status  ("the  Rules").   The  Judge  accepted   that   the
       Respondent was entitled to cease his refugee status on the basis  of
       durable change of circumstances in his home country of  Somalia  but
       allowed his appeal on the basis that his deportation there would not
       be proportionate.


    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia and a  member  of  a  minority
       clan in  Mogadishu.   He  came  to  the  UK  in  2004  having  lived
       previously in Ethiopia for four years.  The Judge accepted  that  he
       last lived in Mogadishu when he was  five  years  old  ([13]).   His
       family live in the UK.  His mother is elderly.  He has  one  brother
       who is married with his own family to support.  Another  brother  is
       unemployed and he has a  sister  who  has  her  own  family  and  is
       supported by her husband.   The Appellant has two  children  from  a
       relationship in the UK but at present is not able  to  have  contact
       with them as the  Appellant's  wife  obtained  a  restraining  order
       against him.


    3. The Appellant's mother arrived in the UK in 2001 and was given leave
       to remain as a refugee in December 2001.  It was as a  dependent  of
       his mother that  the  Appellant  entered  the  UK  and  was  granted
       indefinite leave to remain.  On 29 September 2010, the Appellant was
       convicted  for  criminal  damage  and  sentenced  to   six   months'
       imprisonment.  He was served with a  warning  letter  regarding  his
       immigration status.  On 10 May 2013, the Appellant  was  once  again
       convicted of an offence of "harassment - put in  fear  of  violence"
       and was sentenced to twelve months'  imprisonment  wholly  suspended
       for eighteen months.  On 23 August 2013, the Appellant was convicted
       for breach of conditions and  his  previously  reduced  sentence  of
       eight months was activated.


    4. The  Respondent  gave  notification  on  26  February  2015  of  the
       Appellant's liability to be deported.  It is worth  noting  at  this
       stage that the deportation action  proceeds  under  section  3(5)(a)
       Immigration Act 1971 (on the basis that his presence in  the  UK  is
       not conducive to the  public  good)  and  not  under  the  automatic
       deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.  That is  because
       it is accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant  does  not  fall
       within the automatic deportation provisions because, although he has
       been sentenced to more than twelve months'  imprisonment  in  total,
       that is as a result of the aggregation of two sentences and not  one
       sentence of that duration.  That becomes relevant  when  I  come  to
       consider the error of law alleged in the  Decision.  The  Respondent
       gave as a reason for the deportation action that the  Appellant  had
       been convicted on nine occasions to a  total  of  thirteen  offences
       between May 2008 and August 2014.


    5. On 26 May 2015, the Respondent gave notice to the Appellant  of  her
       intention to cease his refugee status.   She also informed the UNHCR
       of that intention on 9 June 2015. She received representations  from
       UNHCR on 3 July 2015.  She also received  representations  from  the
       Appellant and also from his  solicitors  in  relation  both  to  the
       decision to cease his refugee status and in relation  to  his  human
       rights.   On 26 September 2015, the  Respondent  made  the  decision
       which  is  under  appeal  in  this  case.   When  dealing  with  the
       Appellant's human rights, the  Respondent  considered  the  position
       applying the Immigration Rules at paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A.   It
       was common ground before me that this was incorrect as the Appellant
       is not a "foreign criminal" as defined because  his  sentences  only
       reach the twelve months' threshold by reason of the  aggregation  of
       more than one sentence.  The Respondent  did  not  decide  that  the
       Appellant is a foreign criminal on the basis that his  offences  had
       caused very serious  harm  or  that  he  is  a  persistent  offender
       applying paragraph 398(c).


    6. As I have already noted, by the Decision, Judge Clarke  allowed  the
       appeal on the basis that deportation would  breach  the  Appellant's
       human rights, specifically in relation to Article  8  ECHR.   In  so
       doing, she accepted that the Respondent was wrong  to  have  applied
       the Immigration Rules relating to deportation and  Article  8.   She
       found as a  result  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  "not  in
       accordance with the law".   She  nonetheless  went  on  to  consider
       whether the decision to deport was proportionate.  She found that it
       was not.


    7. Permission to appeal the Decision  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Macleman on 16 June 2016 on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
       that, having  found  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
       accordance with the law, the  Judge  should  not  have  gone  on  to
       consider  proportionality.   He   did   not   exclude   though   the
       Respondent's second ground.


    Grounds of appeal and submissions


    8. The Respondent raises two grounds.  The first is that, having regard
       to what was said by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Mirza  and  others  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ  159,  if
       the Judge was right  to  find  that  the  interference  was  not  in
       accordance with the law at the third stage of Razgar, there  was  no
       basis on which to go on to consider proportionality.  If  the  Judge
       was right in that view, it is submitted, the  proper  course  is  to
       remit to  the  Respondent  to  re-take  the  decision.   Mr  Wilding
       accepted that, as this is a case under the post Immigration Act 2014
       regime, this would involve allowing the appeal on Article 8  grounds
       but  noting  that  the  Respondent  could  reconsider  the  decision
       applying the right legal principles.


    9. The Respondent's second ground concerns the way in which  the  Judge
       dealt with the proportionality assessment.  It is submitted that the
       Judge has given inadequate consideration to the public  interest  in
       deporting the Appellant as someone  with  the  criminal  convictions
       which he has amassed.  In fact, Ms McCarthy very fairly accepted  in
       response to a question from me that it is difficult to see where  in
       the Decision the Judge has given any consideration or weight to that
       public interest.
   10. Mr Wilding also submitted that the Judge was wrong in any  event  to
       find that the interference was not in accordance with the  law.   He
       accepted that, if the Respondent had made  the  decision  to  deport
       applying the wrong legislation, it would have been open to the Judge
       to find that the interference was not in accordance with the law  as
       the Appellant would not then be a person who could be deported under
       the power used.  That though is not this case.  The mistake made  by
       the  Respondent  was  in  applying  the   Rules   when   considering
       proportionality  under  Article  8.   That  did   not   render   the
       deportation action unlawful.  It rendered the Respondent's  approach
       to proportionality mistaken but no more.


   11. Under the post Immigration Act 2014 appeal provisions, the issue for
       the Judge is whether removal (deportation) is contrary to section  6
       Human Rights Act 2000.   The  Tribunal  as  a  public  body  and  in
       accordance with well-established principles has to consider  Article
       8 for itself.  This is not a case where the  Judge  was  considering
       under the previous appeal regime whether the decision  under  appeal
       was in accordance with the law.  Mr Wilding submitted that the Judge
       appeared to have confused the two.


   12. Looking at the way in which the Judge approached proportionality, Mr
       Wilding submitted that the only consideration of the balance between
       the Appellant's rights and the public interest appears  at  [32]  of
       the Decision.  That shows no reflection of the  public  interest  in
       deportation as a result of the Appellant's criminal offending.   The
       only thing there considered is that the Respondent applied the wrong
       Rules and that there are features in the Appellant's case which  are
       "compelling".


   13. I raised with Ms McCarthy how the approach at [32] could be defended
       as  lawful,  particularly  in  the  taking  into  account   of   the
       Respondent's  mistake  as  diminishing  the  public  interest.   She
       accepted that the Judge should not have taken that into account  but
       submitted that was not  in  fact  what  the  Judge  had  done.   She
       submitted that what the  Judge  intended  to  convey  was  that  the
       application  of  the  wrong   Rules   logically   contaminates   the
       proportionality assessment because the offending is not  as  serious
       as the Respondent contended.  She accepted that [32] is badly worded
       but said it was either not an error  or,  if  it  was,  it  was  not
       material.  The Judge had considered whether  deportation  action  is
       outweighed by the factors in the Appellant's case and found that  it
       was.  She accepted "compelling circumstances" is the wrong test  but
       submitted that, if anything, this is too high a test and  any  error
       could not therefore be material.


   14. Ms McCarthy also asked that, if I found that  there  is  a  material
       error I should set aside the Decision as a whole and not simply  the
       finding in relation to the human rights claim.   She  accepted  that
       the Appellant had not cross appealed in relation to the finding that
       his refugee status could be revoked and nor had any rule 24 response
       been submitted on  this  point.   She  submitted  however  that  the
       Respondent's mistake infected her decision to cease the  Appellant's
       refugee  status.   Put  another  way,  had  it  not  been  for   the
       Respondent's mistaken decision, no action would have been  taken  to
       revoke his leave as a refugee.


   15. Mr Wilding objected to  me  dealing  with  the  Judge's  finding  in
       relation to the cessation  of  status.   He  pointed  out  that  the
       Respondent's action was to deport under the 1971 Act which  was  and
       is legally correct.  It was as a result of that  deportation  action
       that a decision was taken to cease  the  Appellant's  status  as  it
       followed that, unless that was done,  the  Appellant  could  not  be
       physically deported in any event.  The Respondent had written to the
       Appellant  about  ceasing  his  refugee  status  months  before  the
       decision under appeal where the mistake was made in relation to  the
       Article 8  consideration.   That  mistake  had  no  bearing  on  the
       decision to revoke status.  The Judge had considered  cessation  and
       made a finding that status could  be  revoked  based  on  a  durable
       change in circumstances.  That finding should stand irrespective  of
       my finding in relation to the human rights claim


   16. Both parties accepted that, if I found a material error of law,  the
       appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  parties
       submitted that in fairness to the Appellant it was appropriate  that
       there   should   be   a   proper   first-instance   assessment    of
       proportionality as the Judge  had  made  only  limited  findings  in
       relation to the Appellant's family and  private  life  ties.   If  I
       found there to be a  material  error  in  relation  to  ground  one,
       however, Mr Wilding accepted  that  the  appeal  would  fall  to  be
       allowed in any  event  and  it  would  then  be  a  matter  for  the
       Respondent whether to remake the decision applying Article 8 outside
       the Rules.


    Discussion and conclusions


   17. In order to consider the way in which the Judge  approached  Article
       8, it is necessary to set out the relevant passage of  the  Decision
       as follows:-
            "[27]      The  Respondent  made  an  error  of  law  when  she
           considered Article 8 in  the  Immigration  Rules  398  and  399.
           Although this is a complete code in deportation cases,  in  this
           case, the  Respondent  wrongly  concluded  the  Appellant  is  a
           "foreign criminal" when he does not fall within  this  category.
           The course left for me to take is to consider Article 8  outside
           the Immigration Rules.  I conclude  that  there  are  compelling
           circumstances in this case  requiring  me  to  make  an  outside
           assessment.  They include that  no  consideration  can  be  made
           within the Rules, and that  the  Appellant  had  refugee  status
           which has been removed, he has children with whom he would  like
           to make contact with and their prospective right  has  not  been
           considered.
            [28] The Appellant has a family life with his  adult  relatives
           because they live together in the  same  accommodation  and  the
           Appellant is dependent  upon  them  for  financial  as  well  as
           emotional support.  Even if I am wrong about  this  finding,  he
           clearly has a developed private life  having  lived  in  the  UK
           since his arrival and his family members are a significant  part
           of that private life.
             [29]  If  the  Appellant  is  deported  there  would   be   an
           interference with the family and private life.  He would not see
           his adult family members who have been  granted  refugee  status
           unless they visit Somalia, a country they fled.  He  has  worked
           in the UK but is as yet not able to work.  He  has  children  in
           the UK and whilst there is an order restraining contact with the
           wife and children, there is no evidence as to whether supervised
           contact could be resumed.
            [30] The decision taken by the Respondent is not in  accordance
           with the  law  because  the  Respondent  wrongly  concluded  the
           Appellant is a "foreign criminal" when he does not  fall  within
           this category.  In light of this error of law, the  case  should
           be allowed,  because  the  Respondent  has  concluded  that  the
           Appellant should be deported when it is  not  in  every  case  a
           convicted criminal faces deportation.
            [31] Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
           Act 2002 has to be considered  when  considering  the  issue  of
           proportionality and weight  given  to  the  public  interest  in
           removal of the Appellant.  I note that he speaks English, he had
           leave when he built up his family and private life  in  the  UK.
           Clearly the Appellant does not have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           parental relationship with his children.
            [32] I move on to consider whether it is proportionate for  the
           Appellant  to  be  deported  and  I  conclude  that  it  is  not
           proportionate because of the error of law by the  Respondent  as
           well as other features in the case which I  have  concluded  are
           compelling circumstances.  These outweigh any public interest in
           removing the Appellant because he entered with leave  which  was
           only removed when  the  refugee  status  was  removed,  and  the
           trigger for that removal is the error of law by  the  Respondent
           in labelling the Appellant as a "foreign criminal".  Looking  at
           all of the features in the round, I allow the appeal."


   18. The difficulties with the Decision in fact stem  from  [30]  of  the
       Decision.  However, even before that point, it is not clear  whether
       the  Judge  understood  the  process  which  an  analysis   of   the
       Appellant's human rights required.  I say that because, although the
       Judge notes at [27] that the Article 8 claim fell to  be  considered
       outside the Rules because the Rules did not apply in this case,  she
       appears to have felt the need to justify that by  reference  to  the
       Respondent's mistake in considering the claim within  the  Rules  as
       well as requiring compelling considerations.  This is  not  a  Nagre
       type situation where  the  Rules  apply  unless  there  are  factors
       outside the Rules which need to be considered in that context.  This
       is a deportation case and therefore ordinarily the Rules would apply
       as a complete code.  However, that complete code did not apply.  The
       Judge  should  therefore  have  directed  herself  that  the  proper
       approach is the  standard  proportionality  assessment  outside  the
       Rules applying the Razgar principles.


   19. However, although those principles are not set out,  I  accept  that
       this does appear to be the exercise which the Judge was embarking on
       at [28] and  [29].   However,  when  the  Judge  reached  the  third
       question (whether the interference is in accordance with  the  law),
       the Judge has fallen into error.  This  is  because  the  Judge  has
       confused the consideration of the Article 8 claim with the  decision
       which is the operative interference.  The decision which was made to
       deport the Appellant in fact pre-dates  the  refusal  of  his  human
       rights claim which is the decision under appeal.


   20. There is also an indication in this paragraph  that  the  Judge  has
       confused the question of whether a decision is  in  accordance  with
       the  law  and  whether  the  Respondent's  interference   with   the
       Appellant's rights is in accordance with the  law.   It  is  perhaps
       understandable that the Judge confused the two due to the difference
       in the pre-Immigration Act 2014 and post 2014 Act schemes.  However,
       the decision in which the mistake was made by the Respondent is  not
       the decision to deport the Appellant which was made in February 2015
       based on the  (correct)  legal  power  that  his  presence  was  not
       conducive  to  the  public  good.   That  is  the   decision   which
       constitutes the interference.  That was not unlawful; the Respondent
       had and has the power to deport  the  Appellant  on  the  basis  she
       employed. Accordingly, the interference with the Appellant's  family
       and private life by reason of the  decision  to  deport  him  is  in
       accordance with the law.  The Judge was wrong to find  that  it  was
       not.


   21. I also agree with the Respondent that, if the Judge had  been  right
       to find that the interference was not in accordance  with  the  law,
       there was no basis on which to consider whether the interference was
       disproportionate.  The assessment  stops  there.  However,  since  I
       accept that the Judge was wrong to find that  the  interference  was
       not in accordance with the law and since the Judge has  gone  on  to
       assess proportionality, I also need to consider her findings in that
       regard since, if she has not erred in law in  that  assessment,  any
       error  in  relation  to  the  third  question  in  Razgar  would  be
       immaterial.


   22. The Judge rightly  considered  at  [31]  section  117B  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She was right  to  ignore  section
       117C as the Appellant is not a foreign criminal as defined  for  the
       purposes  of  that  section.   However,  the  public   interest   in
       deportation is not irrelevant simply because section 117C  does  not
       apply.  As Mr Wilding pointed out, prior to the  Rules  and  section
       117C, the public interest in deportation of criminal  offenders  was
       already recognised as weighty (see OH (Serbia v Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 694 at [16]).   That  public
       interest had to be considered and weighed in the balance.


   23. In spite of Ms McCarthy's valiant attempts to  defend  [32]  of  the
       Decision as showing that the Judge adopted the right approach, I  am
       quite unable to read into that paragraph any  consideration  of  the
       public interest in deportation.  Indeed, it seems  to  me  that  the
       Judge has committed a further  error  in  taking  into  account  the
       Respondent's mistaken approach as in some way  reducing  the  public
       interest.  That is irrelevant in the exercise which the Judge should
       have  been  carrying  out  of  assessing  Article  8  for   herself.
       Conversely, though, there is no mention of the very relevant fact of
       the Appellant's offending as counterbalance  to  the  weight  to  be
       given to the interference with the Appellant's  family  and  private
       life.


   24. For the above reasons, I find that the Judge made a  material  error
       of law in allowing the appeal on the basis  that  deportation  would
       breach the Appellant's Article 8 rights.


   25. As discussed at the hearing,  the  appropriate  course  is  for  the
       appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-hearing  of
       the human rights claim  before  a  different  Judge.   I  reject  Ms
       McCarthy's submission that the  Decision  should  be  set  aside  in
       relation to  cessation  of  the  Appellant's  refugee  status.   The
       Respondent's decision to revoke refugee status was made as a  result
       of the Respondent's decision to deport the  Appellant.   As  I  have
       already noted, there is no unlawfulness in that decision  and  there
       is therefore no infection of the decision to  cease  status  by  the
       later mistake as to the application of the  Article  8  Rules.   The
       decision to cease status was made on the basis that there has been a
       durable change of circumstances in Somalia such that the Appellant's
       status can be revoked.  It is of course the case  that,  absent  the
       decision to deport the Appellant, the Respondent may not have  taken
       that action.  However, the decision to deport the Appellant  is  not
       infected by the mistaken approach to the Article 8 claim.  The Judge
       has upheld the decision  to  cease  status  by  application  of  the
       correct principles and law.  There was no cross appeal  in  relation
       to those findings.


   26. I therefore  set  aside  the  Decision  insofar  as  it  allows  the
       Appellant's appeal on Article 8  grounds.  I  do  not  preserve  any
       findings as a proper analysis of the proportionality assessment will
       require more in depth findings than have currently been made both in
       relation to the Appellant's family and private life and in  relation
       to his criminal offending.  In any event, his Article 8 rights  will
       need to be assessed based on the  circumstances  pertaining  at  the
       date of the further hearing.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.
I set aside the Decision insofar as it  allows  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
Article 8 grounds.  I remit the appeal to the First-Tier  Tribunal  for  re-
hearing with the direction that it be heard by another Judge of  the  First-
Tier Tribunal.
Signed           [pic] Date     27 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
