
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00018/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2019                           |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   ASJ A-S

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Sardar, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co.
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1960  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Somalia. The appellant came to the United Kingdom in September 2002 and
    applied for asylum. He was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
    refugee on 14 November 2002. By a decision dated  1  August  2007,  the
    respondent decided the deport the  appellant.  The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision and his appeal was allowed by a decision dated 26
    June 2009.

 2. The appellant has long history of criminal offending. Full  details  of
    his criminal history are set out in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    which is the subject of this appeal at [4-7].  The  index  offence  was
    committed in November 2012.  The  appellant  assaulted  several  prison
    officers whilst held in the health wing of a prison in Birmingham.  The
    First-tier Tribunal judge wrote at:

         "The appellant was convicted on four counts; two counts of  assault
         occasioning actual bodily harm to counts of  section  18  wounding.
         The jury found that the appellant knew perfectly well what  he  was
         doing when he committed the offences; he had  planned  the  attack.
         However, there was  psychiatric  evidence  to  establish  that  the
         appellant was  suffering  from  a  serious  mental  illness  and  a
         recommendation  was  made  for  a  hospital  order.  The  appellant
         received an indefinite hospital  order  under  section  37  of  the
         Mental Health Act (with a restriction order under section 41 of the
         Act)."

 3. The appellant was  served  with  a  notice  under  section  72  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  At  [46],  following  an
    extensive analysis of the issues, the judge found  that  the  appellant
    had rebutted the  presumption  under  section  72.  That  part  of  her
    decision has not been challenged by the Secretary of State.

 4. By a decision dated 4 January 2018, the  appellant  was  subject  to  a
    decision for automatic deportation under the  provisions  of  the  2007
    Act. On same date, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    protection and human rights claim. The appellant appealed that decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  25
    September 2018, allowed the appeal 'under the refugee Convention, under
    article 3 under Article 15 (c) and under Article 8.' The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. At the outset of the hearing, reference was made to the decision of the
    Upper Tribunal in SB (refugee revocation;  IDP  camps)  Somalia  [2019]
    UKUT 00358 (IAC). That case had only been reported on 18 November 2019.
    Mr Mills, who appeared for the Secretary of State, had a  copy  of  the
    decision but Ms Samra, who appeared for the appellant, had not seen it.
    She was given a copy of the decision and I gave her the opportunity  to
    read it.

 6. At [54], the judge wrote:

         "I find that the appellant would  be  particularly  vulnerable  and
         return due to his mental health condition; he  would  be  returning
         without a support network in place and without friends  and  family
         to assist him. He is from a minority clan, he has no  formal  links
         to Mogadishu, there is nothing before  me  to  establish  that  the
         appellant would have clan support, and  he  will  have  no  ongoing
         financial support. Pursuant to MOJ & Others Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT
         00443 (IAC), I find that there is a real risk  that  the  appellant
         will have no alternative but to  live  in  makeshift  accommodation
         within an IDP camp, where there is  a  real  possibility  that  the
         living conditions will fall below those acceptable in  humanitarian
         terms. He is therefore entitled  to  protection  under  Article  15
         (c)."

 7. Mr Mills submitted that  this  paragraph  is  problematic.  First,  the
    jurisprudence has developed in a way which renders the judge's  finding
    wrong in law. In SB, the Upper Tribunal, held that:

         "(2) The conclusion of the Court of Appeal in  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ  442  was  that  the
         country guidance in MOJ & Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
         [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) did not include any finding that  a  person
         who finds themselves in an IDP  camp  is  thereby  likely  to  face
         Article  3  ECHR  harm  (having  regard  to  the   high   threshold
         established by D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 43 and N v  United
         Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 39). Although that conclusion may have  been
         obiter, it was confirmed by Hamblen LJ in MS  (Somalia).  There  is
         nothing in  the  country  guidance  in  AA  and  Others  (conflict;
         humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  [2011]  UKUT  00445
         (IAC) that requires a different view to be taken of the position of
         such a person. It will be an error of law for a judge to refuse  to
         follow the Court of Appeal's conclusion on this issue."

    Mr Mills submitted that it was an error of law to find,  as  the  judge
    has in the instant appeal, that  the  appellant  would  be  exposed  to
    Article 3 ECHR risk in  an  IDP  camp;  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the
    reference to Article 15(c) was plainly erroneous  and  that  the  judge
    must have intended to refer to Article 3 ECHR, a submission with  which
    Ms Sardar did not seek to disagree. Ms Sardar did, however, submit  the
    judge's findings regarding the appellant's mental health condition were
    open to her as were the findings which she made regarding  the  absence
    of friends or family support in Somalia for the appellant and that  may
    impact upon his mental state. She submitted  that  the  expert  medical
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal showed that, without the family
    support which  the  appellant  receives  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    appellant would simply be unable to 'cope' on his own Somalia.

 8. I wish to stress that Judge Robertson who determined this appeal in the
    First-tier Tribunal has carried out an extremely thorough analysis.  It
    is no fault of hers that the case law upon which she based her analysis
    has altered in the  period  since  permission  to  appeal  against  her
    decision was granted to the Secretary of State. However, I  agree  with
    Mr Mills that the finding which the judge makes at [54] cannot stand in
    the light of recent developments in the  jurisprudence.  Assuming  that
    the judge was referring to Article 3 ECHR and not Article 15(c) it  now
    transpires that she should not have concluded that  conditions  in  IDP
    camps in Somalia contravene Article 3 ECHR.

 9. At [51], the judge found that the appellant's  mental  health  problems
    would prevent him finding employment in Somalia. In the same paragraph,
    however, she did observe that mental health services are  available  in
    Somalia, albeit that the overall picture for provision of such services
    remains 'bleak.' The judge concluded that the appellant  would  not  be
    able to 'obtain the medication he requires to keep him  stable  and  in
    the absence of medication there is a real risk that his  mental  health
    condition is likely to deteriorate.' Mr Mills submitted that the  judge
    had placed inappropriate reliance upon the case of  Paposhvilli  [2017]
    Imm AR 867 and had misunderstood the judgement of the Court  of  Appeal
    in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64. He submitted that  the  judge  had
    overstated the extent to which Paposhvilli  had  changed  the  test  in
    medical Article 3 ECHR cases whilst she had overlooked  the  principles
    of Bensaid v United Kingdom - 44599/98  [2001]  ECHR  82;  it  was  not
    appropriate to carry out a comparison  of  medical  facilities  in  the
    United Kingdom and those  available  in  Somalia.  In  any  event,  the
    appellant's circumstances did not  fall  within  the  provisions  of  N
    (2005) UKHL  31  which  remained  good  law  until  the  Supreme  Court
    determines otherwise.

10. At [55], the judge found that this was a rare case where the  appellant
    was entitled to Article 3 ECHR protection on the basis  of  his  mental
    health. Although she found that the appellant's mental  health  decline
    would not necessarily be rapid, she did find that there was  sufficient
    evidence to show that, without medication, it would be irreversible.

11. There may well be much force in that latter finding and,  as  Mr  Mills
    observed, any delay in the final determination  this  appeal  may  mean
    that it is heard after the Supreme Court has delivered its judgement on
    the proper application of Paposhvilli, a judgement which may well prove
    to favour the appellant. However, at the  present  time,  and  for  the
    reasons given by Mr Mills, I find the judge erred  by  concluding  that
    the appellant's mental  health  condition  is  and  is  likely  in  the
    foreseeable future to be so poor as to expose him to an Article 3  ECHR
    risk. The fact remains that, despite being  extremely  limited,  mental
    health services do function in Somalia and the  element  of  comparison
    between circumstances there and in the United Kingdom which features in
    the judge's analysis  was  not  appropriate.  The  appellant's  current
    condition does not arguably fall within the parameters  established  in
    N.

12. The judge also allowed the appeal under Article 8. Ms Sardar  submitted
    that neither the original grounds filed by the Secretary of  State  nor
    the amended grounds make  reference  to  Article  8  and  that  it  was
    therefore not open to the Secretary of State to challenge  the  judge's
    determination of the Article 8 appeal.  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the
    judge's  reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article   8   grounds
    effectively reiterated her findings as  regards  Article  15(c)  (which
    both parties appear to agree are inappropriate and wrong  in  law)  and
    Article 3 ECHR (which Mr Mills submitted, and I agree, was  also  wrong
    in law). I agree with Mr  Mills.  Normally,  neither  party  should  be
    allowed to pursue an appeal in relation  to  a  matter  which  did  not
    appear in the grounds/amended grounds of appeal.  However,  given  that
    the judge has set out in terms the basis for  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds and I find that that entire basis is itself flawed by
    legal error, it would make little sense to allow the Article 8 decision
    to stand.

13. In conclusion, I find that the judge has fallen into  legal  error  for
    the reasons which I have outlined above. I  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision. The findings of fact and conclusions are set  aside,
    save for that in relation to Section 72, which is not challenged. There
    will need to be a new fact-finding exercise which is  better  conducted
    in the First-tier Tribunal and accordingly the appeal  is  returned  to
    that Tribunal to remake the decision at or following a hearing.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.  Save  for  the
    determination of the decision in respect of section 72  of  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, none of the findings shall stand.  The
    appeal is returned to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal  to
    remake the decision at or following a hearing.


Signed                              Date 19 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






















