
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00072/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Considered on the papers                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 4 December 2020                             |On: 14 December 2020           |
|                                                |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     am
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  I
    Ross, promulgated on 20 April 2020. Permission to appeal was granted by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 21 May 2020.

Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction was made earlier  in  these  proceedings  and  I
    consider it appropriate that this matter continue to be anonymised.



Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 20 October  2003,  aged  10
    and accompanying his mother  and  siblings.  He  was  recognised  as  a
    refugee on 24 June 2009 as a dependant of his  mother.   The  appellant
    has a considerable criminal record, commencing in 2009. Most  recently,
    in 2018, he was convicted of robbery  and  assault  occasioning  actual
    bodily harm and received a prison sentence of 5 years and 6 months.  On
    26 June 2019, the respondent revoked the appellant's refugee status and
    on 10 July 2019, a deportation order was made. On  15  July  2019,  the
    respondent refused the appellant's protection and  human  rights  claim
    which was made on 21 August 2018, concluding that there  were  no  very
    compelling circumstances. The appellant appealed on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. As a preliminary issue, the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    appellant represented a danger to  the  community,  with  reference  to
    section 72 of the  2002  Act.  His  protection  claims  were  therefore
    dismissed, as was his appeal against revocation of his refugee  status.
    The judge found there to be no very compelling circumstances  over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 of section 117C  (1)(6)  of
    the 2002 Act.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal can be summarised as follows.

     - A complete failure to have regard to the country expert evidence  or
       UNHCR opinion

     - There was no consideration of the risk to the appellant on return

     - There was no assessment of the claim under Article 3 ECHR

     - The Article 8 assessment was incomplete

     - The consideration of section 72 was erroneous

 6. Permission to appeal was granted, with the following commentary:

    "It is arguable that in making  no  reference  to  or  findings  on  an
    expert's report which is case specific and post-dates MOJ  by  5  years
    when considering risk on  return  either  in  reference  to  asylum  or
    Article 3, the Judge has  materially  erred.  The  s72  and  Article  8
    grounds appear to me to have less merit, but I do not limit the  grant.
    "

Directions

 7. Directions were emailed to the parties on 30  October  2020.  The  said
    directions communicated that a provisional view had been taken that the
    matter  could  be  decided  without  a  hearing  and  invited   written
    submissions regarding whether the First-tier Tribunal made an error  of
    law and whether that decision should be set  aside.  The  parties  were
    further invited to submit reasons if it was considered that  a  hearing
    was necessary.

 8. Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  states
    that the Upper Tribunal may make any decision with or without a hearing
    but must have regard to any view expressed by  a  party  when  deciding
    whether to do.

 9. The respondent has yet to give an indication of  her  view  as  to  the
    issue of whether the error of law matter  could  be  justly  determined
    without a hearing. The appellant's response was sent  by  email  on  10
    November 2020, which enclosed further submissions drafted  by  counsel.
    In essence, counsel stated that a hearing was  not  necessary  provided
    the respondent conceded the errors of law,  the  Tribunal  agreed  with
    those concessions, set aside the decision and remitted  the  matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

10. On 11 November 2020, the Upper Tribunal received the respondent's  Rule
    24 response. It suffices to say that the Secretary  of  State  did  not
    oppose the appellant's  appeal  and  grounds  1-4  were  conceded.  The
    respondent  argued  that  the  reasoning  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    regarding the s72 matter  was  adequate.  The  respondent  expressed  a
    preference for the matter to be retained at the Upper Tribunal but  did
    not oppose a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal with the s.72 findings
    preserved.

11. I have considered the judgment in JCWI v The  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin) and conclude that the appellant  will
    not be disadvantaged by the error of law issue being decided without  a
    hearing in this instance for the  following  reasons.  The  appellant's
    representatives  raised   no   objections   to   the   proposed   paper
    consideration in  certain  circumstances  which  have  been  met.   The
    respondent conceded four out of  five  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  a
    concession which I have accepted below. In addition, the matter  is  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing given  the
    seriousness of the omissions from the decision under appeal.

Decision on error of law

12. The Secretary of State  rightly  concedes  that  all  but  one  of  the
    multiple issues raised in the grounds of appeal are made out.  All  the
    grounds have the same theme, that is a  failure  to  consider  all  the
    evidence submitted and submissions made on the appellant's behalf.  The
    judge gave no indication in the decision that  he  had  considered  the
    expert's report or the opinion  of  UNHCR  and  he  did  not  give  any
    awareness of the fact that there was an Article 3 case to be  assessed.
    The respondent  rightly  concedes  that  these  errors  may  have  also
    infected the judge's Article 8 consideration.

13. I am not prepared to  preserve  the  s72  decision  for  the  following
    reasons. The judge's assessment was unbalanced  with  the  only  factor
    taken into account on the  appellant's  side  in  what  was  a  lengthy
    consideration [23-33] being his expressed remorse. It is apparent  from
    [10-15] of the decision and reasons, that there was evidence before the
    judge regarding the courses the appellant  took  in  prison,  that  his
    crimes were committed when he was young  and  under  the  influence  of
    illicit drugs and that he was now clean, that he had  moved  away  from
    his associations, he had obtained skills while  imprisoned  and  was  a
    trusted prisoner. In addition, his mother gave relevant evidence to the
    First-tier Tribunal. None of these factors was mentioned in the judge's
    s72 consideration.  In these circumstances, the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside with no findings preserved.

14. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing.  While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements of 10 February  2010,  it  is  the  case  that  the
    appellant has yet to have an adequate consideration of  his  protection
    and human rights appeal at the First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be
    unfair to deprive him of such consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House IAC, with a time estimate of 3 hours, by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge I Ross.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:
Date 11 January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



