

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  RP/00170/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On Tuesday 29 October 2019              |On Wednesday 13 November 2019    |
|                                        |                                 |

                                   Before
                               MR JUSTICE DOVE
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between
                                     CT
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, Counsel instructed by Kadmos
                    Consultants
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,  as
this  appeal  raises  protection  issues,  it  is  appropriate  to  make  an
anonymity order.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the Appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      K Swinnerton promulgated on 5  July  2019  ("the  Decision").  By  the
      Decision the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision dated 23 October 2018  refusing  his  protection
      and human rights claims made in the context of a  decision  to  deport
      him to Vietnam. Also of relevance to our consideration of  the  issues
      are decisions dated 13 September 2017 notifying the Appellant that the
      Respondent intended to cease his refugee status and one dated  24  May
      2018 making the decision to cease refugee status applying  Article  1C
      (5) of the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status  of  Refugees  ("the
      Refugee Convention").  Those decisions did not give rise to a right of
      appeal but the cessation of status  forms  part  of  the  Respondent's
      decision under appeal.  In her decision, the Respondent  also  applied
      section 72 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 72")
      to exclude the Appellant from Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.



2.    The Appellant appealed the Respondent's  decision  on  protection  and
      human rights grounds (Article 3 and 8 ECHR) and  also  challenged  the
      decision to revoke as well as the  application  of  Section  72.   The
      Judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

3.    The Appellant raised the following grounds of appeal  challenging  the
      Decision:

           (1)   The Judge  failed  properly  to  assess  the  evidence  in
           relation  to  the  danger  which  the  Appellant  poses  to  the
           community when considering Section 72 (Ground One);

           (2)   The Judge erred in  his  consideration  of  the  cessation
           decision in the following ways:

           (a)    Failed to  consider  whether  there  was  a  durable  and
           fundamental change in the circumstances which led to  the  grant
           of refugee status and failed to take into  account  the  UNHCR's
           views in that regard (Ground Two)

           (c)   Failed to consider whether there were  compelling  reasons
           arising from past persecution such  that  the  cessation  clause
           should not be applied (Ground Three);

           (d)    Failed  to   consider   the   evidence   concerning   the
           circumstances of  the  Appellant's  family  members  in  Vietnam
           (Ground Four);

           (e)   Failed properly to evaluate the Appellant's expert  report
           in light of the findings about the  Appellant's  family  members
           (Ground Five).

           (3)   The Judge failed properly  to  consider  the  medical  and
           background  evidence  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  health
           applying both Articles 3 and 8 (Ground Six).

           (4)   The Judge failed properly to consider the evidence  as  to
           the Appellant's relationship with his children (Ground Seven).

4.    Permission to appeal was granted  on  limited  grounds  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge I D Boyes on 2 August 2019 in the following  terms  (so
      far as relevant):


           "...2.      The grounds assert  that  the  Judge  erred  in  the
           consideration of the presumption of s.72 (ground  1),  erred  in
           the consideration of the durable  change  argument  (ground  2),
           erred in the compelling reasons argument (ground 3).  In  ground
           4 it is argued that the Judge erred by failing to have regard to
           the appellant's  evidence.   Ground  5  alleges  errors  in  the
           Article 3 assessment  and  Ground  6  alleges  failures  in  the
           article 8 assessment.
           3.    Ground  1  is  arguable.   The  Judge  arguably  does  not
           consider the material provided from Lisa Davis nor the relevance
           of this in light of the failings of the OASYS report.
           4.    Ground 2 is arguable.  The Judge was required to  consider
           whether any changes were  durable.   It  is  arguable  that  the
           absence  of  specific  findings  on  this  issue   support   the
           contention the Judge fell into error.
           5.    Ground 3 flows from Ground 2 and is arguable.
           6.    Ground 4 is not arguable.  Weight given to evidence is not
      an error of law.
           7.    Ground 5 is not arguable.  The Judge  has  considered  the
           matter with care.  It is not arguable as the  Judge  found  that
           the appellant could not achieve some treatment.  The  very  high
           threshold of Article [3] did not apply found the Judge and there
           is no arguable error identifiable.
           8.    Ground 6 is not arguable.  This was not a strong  part  of
           the appellant's  claim  as  the  Judge  found.   The  Judge  was
           entitled to refuse it and did so in a manner which was perfectly
           proper.
           9.    Permission is granted on grounds 1, 2, 3. Refused on 4, 5,
      6."

5.    As will be readily apparent, the numbering adopted by Judge  Boyes  is
      not the same as the numbering which  we  have  used  to  identify  the
      various grounds at [3] above. Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  made  that
      point when refusing the renewed application for permission in relation
      to the grounds on which permission was refused by  Judge  Boyes.   She
      identified four grounds on which permission had been refused and  made
      the following observations:


           "1.   Ground 4 (paras 3-4 of the renewed grounds)  is  that,  in
                 his assessment of whether there has been a  durable  change
                 in circumstances and  whether  there  are  very  compelling
                 reasons arising  out  of  previous  persecution  such  that
                 cessation/revocation of refugee status  should  not  apply,
                 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  K  Swinnerton  erred  by
                 failing to have regard to  the  appellant's  evidence  when
                 considering the circumstances of family members in Vietnam.
                 Ground 4 is unarguable as it is clear from para 25  of  his
                 decision that Judge  Swinnerton  was  fully  aware  of  the
                 appellant's evidence that his sister returned to Vietnam on
                 holiday and became ill there.  The judge took into  account
                 the evidence of two of the appellant's  children  who  said
                 that their aunt was living in  Vietnam.   It  is  therefore
                 unarguable that the judge failed  to  have  regard  to  the
                 appellant's evidence that his sister was  only  temporarily
                 in Vietnam.  The judge was unarguably  entitled  to  reject
                 the appellant's evidence and  find  that  he  does  have  a
                 sister who is living in Vietnam.  Further and in any event,
                 the  judge  was  unarguably  entitled  to  find  that   the
                 appellant would also be able to receive  support  from  his
                 partner's three siblings and her parents (para 25).
                 This ground is therefore in reality an attempt to  re-argue
                 the evidence although advanced as a failure by the judge to
                 consider relevant evidence.
           2.    Ground 5 (para 5 of the renewed grounds) is that the judge
                 erred in his assessment of the expert evidence of Professor
                 Bluth, in that, the judge said that  he  only  placed  some
                 weight on  the  expert's  report  because  the  expert  had
                 assessed the appellant's evidence on the basis that he  had
                 no close family in Vietnam whereas, as argued in ground  4,
                 the judge erred in assessing the appellant's  circumstances
                 in Vietnam. Accordingly, following on from  ground  4,  the
                 judge also erred in his approach to the expert's evidence.
                 This ground is unarguable for the following reasons:
              i) Firstly, the judge did not arguably err in law as contended
                 in ground 4.
             ii) Secondly, the remainder of ground 5, which  seeks  to  rely
                 upon other aspects of  the  evidence  of  Professor  Bluth,
                 ignores the fact that, at para 25 of the judge's  decision,
                 he made it clear that the only aspect of  the  evidence  of
                 Professor Bluth that he had difficulty with  was  the  fact
                 that he had relied upon the appellant's  evidence  that  he
                 had no family or other ties in Vietnam.  There is no reason
                 to think that the  judge  had  difficulty  with  any  other
                 aspect of the evidence of Professor Bluth.   Nor  is  there
                 any reason to think that he did not  take  all  aspects  of
                 Professor Bluth's report into account, particularly  as  he
                 said at para 18 of his decision that he had taken  all  the
                 evidence into account.
                 It is  simply  unarguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
                 assessment of the remainder  of  the  report  of  Professor
                 Bluth.  For example, he specifically took into account  the
                 likelihood of the appellant being able to obtain  household
                 registration - see para 24.  In any  event,  this  part  of
                 ground 5 ignores the fact that the judge found that:
                 a) The appellant has a sister  who  is  living  in  Vietnam
                    (para 25);
                 b) He would be able to obtain support from the siblings and
                    parents of his partner (para 25);
                 c) The evidence produced by the respondent and as described
                    in the refusal letter shows that treatment for  diabetic
                    retinopathy   was   available   in   Vietnam    although
                    affordability of care and treatment may be an issue  for
                    those living in remote areas (para 26); and
                 d) His children in the United Kingdom would be able to give
                    him financial support in order to access treatment (para
                    26).
           3.    Ground 6 (paras 7-10 of the renewed grounds) is  that  the
                 judge erred in law in his consideration of the  appellant's
                 Article 3  and  Article  8  claims  based  on  his  medical
                 condition.  This ground is wholly unarguable given the high
                 threshold for Article 3 claims based on  medical  condition
                 and, in any event, given para 2(a), (b), (c) and (d) above.
                  Again, in reality, this ground amounts to no more than  an
                 attempt to re-argue the case.
           4.    Ground 7 (paras 11-12 of the renewed grounds) is that  the
                 judge erred in law in concluding that there  were  no  very
                 compelling circumstances over  and  above  the  exceptions.
                 This ground is also unarguable for the following reasons:
           (i)   Firstly, para 11 of the grounds contends that the  judge's
                 finding that the appellant  plays  no  meaningful  part  in
                 [A]'s life was not supported by any of the evidence  before
                 him.  This aspect of ground 7 simply  ignores  the  judge's
                 reasoning at para 28 of his decision.  Again, this part  of
                 ground 7 amounts to no more than an attempt to re-argue the
                 case, albeit that the ground is advanced  as  an  assertion
                 that the judge's finding was speculative because there  was
                 no evidence to support it.  There  plainly  and  unarguably
                 was such evidence.
           (ii)  The remainder of ground 7 contends that [A]'s mother lacks
                 the ability to help [A] with his homework and to  help  [A]
                 understand the other aspects of life relevant  to  a  child
                 growing up in the United Kingdom.  This part of ground 7 is
                 also unarguable.  In the first place,  the  judge  made  it
                 clear that he had considered all of the evidence.   He  did
                 not need to  specifically  refer  to  the  social  worker's
                 report at para 28 of his decision.  Secondly,  and  in  any
                 event, this part of ground 7 ignores the  judge's  finding,
                 which was unarguably open to him on the  evidence  for  the
                 reasons he gave (see para 28), that the appellant  plays  a
                 minimal role in the life of [A] and that "he can in no  way
                 be said to have  been  a  source  of  stability,  security,
                 emotional or financial support for him". Furthermore,  this
                 part of ground 7 ignores the  reasoning  of  the  Court  of
                 Appeal in SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 in which
                 the Court of Appeal said, in relation to the fact  that  PG
                 had been able to intervene when his son had been threatened
                 with a knife, could not elevate the case above the norm  so
                 as to make it unduly harsh for the wife/son  to  remain  in
                 the IK without him.  This judgment  not  only  demonstrates
                 the elevated threshold  in  establishing  what  amounts  to
                 "unduly harsh" but the consequential high threshold for the
                 requirement  to  show  that  there  are   very   compelling
                 circumstances over and above the exceptions.
           All of the renewed grounds are therefore wholly unarguable.   In
           the main, they contend that the judge failed to consider various
           aspects  of  the  evidence  and/or  that   his   findings   were
           speculative but, in reality, they amount  to  no  more  than  an
           attempt to re-argue the case."

6.    The issues raised by the grounds which the  Appellant  has  permission
      to argue were helpfully  summarised  by  Ms  Pinder  in  her  skeleton
      argument as follows:

      Ground One: Whether the Judge properly considered  and  evaluated  the
      evidence in relation to the danger which the Appellant  poses  to  the
      community for the purposes of Section 72;

      Ground Two: Whether the Judge failed properly or at  all  to  consider
      whether any changes in Vietnam were durable taking  into  account  the
      views of UNHCR, the background  evidence  and  the  expert  report  of
      Professor Bluth.

      Ground  Three:  Whether  the  Judge  failed  to  consider   compelling
      circumstances when considering whether it  was  appropriate  to  cease
      refugee status.

7.    The matter comes  before  us  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
      disclose an error of law and to re-make the decision or remit  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.



Discussion and Conclusions

Ground three

8.          We can deal shortly with ground three.   Having  considered  the
      Respondent's Rule 24 reply, Ms  Pinder  accepted  that  the  Appellant
      could not rely on the "compelling reasons" exception to Article  1C(5)
      as that applies only to statutory refugees and the  Appellant  is  not
      such  a  refugee  (see  AMA  (Article  1C(5)  -  proviso  -   internal
      relocation) Somalia [2019] UKUT 11  (IAC)  -  "AMA").   She  drew  our
      attention however to  the  Respondent's  "Asylum  Policy  Instruction,
      Revocation of Refugee Status: Version 4.0" which  says  the  following
      about this exception:


            "Article 1C(5) and (6) of  the  Refugee  Convention  contain  an
           exception to the cessation provisions,  allowing  a  refugee  to
           invoke 'compelling reasons arising out of previous  persecution'
           for refusing to re-avail himself or herself of the protection of
           their country of origin.
            This exception applies to cases where refugees, or their  family
           members, have suffered truly atrocious forms of persecution  and
           it is unreasonable to expect them to return to their country  of
           origin or former habitual residence.  This might,  for  example,
           include:
               . Ex-camp or prison detainees
               . Survivors or witnesses of particularly  traumatic  violence
                 against family members, including sexual violence
               . Those who are severely traumatised
           The presumption is that such persons have suffered grave acts of
           persecution, including at the hands of  elements  of  the  local
           population, and  therefore  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to
           return.  Application of the 'compelling  reasons'  exception  is
           interpreted to extend beyond the actual words of  the  provision
           to apply to  Article  1A(2)  refugees  and  reflects  a  general
           humanitarian principle.
           As this  provision  is  expected  to  apply  only  in  the  most
           exceptional  of  cases,  any  decision  not  to   proceed   with
           revocation on this basis must be taken by a senior caseworker."
           [our emphasis]

9.           Ms  Pinder  of  course  relies  on  the  words  which  we  have
      emboldened above. We remind ourselves that we are  here  dealing  with
      whether there is an error of law in the Decision.  We accept that this
      issue was raised at [21] of the Appellant's skeleton  argument  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.   We accept that it is not addressed directly
      by the Judge although he does refer to AMA at [24]  of  the  Decision.
      However, we would not have found this ground to demonstrate a material
      error of law taken alone based on the facts and circumstances  of  the
      Appellant's case for two reasons.  First, as is said in  the  headnote
      of the decision in AMA, "[t]he SSHD's guidance regarding the  role  of
      past persecution cannot in itself form a lawful basis for finding that
      removal would lead to a breach of the Refugee  Convention,  given  the
      limited appeal rights at section 82 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002, as amended.."  Second, what is required  is  "the
      most  exceptional  of  cases"  based  on  "truly  atrocious  forms  of
      persecution"  such  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
      individual to return to his home country.  That is not this case.

Ground Two

10.         Although much of the focus of the submissions to us was  on  the
      first of the grounds, Ms Pinder agreed with our  view  that  it  makes
      sense to consider ground two  first  as,  if  there  is  an  error  in
      relation to the Judge's analysis of the cessation  issue,  it  is  not
      necessary to go on to consider the Section 72 issue.  As a  matter  of
      logic, if refugee status can lawfully  be  ceased,  it  is  no  longer
      relevant whether an individual could be excluded  from  protection  of
      the Refugee Convention as it would no longer apply.

11.         Article  1C  (5)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  ("hereafter  the
      Cessation Clause") provides as follows:


            "This Convention shall cease to  apply  to  any  person  falling
           under the terms of Section A if:
                 ...
            (5)  He can no longer, because the  circumstances  in  connexion
           with which he has been recognized as a refugee  have  ceased  to
           exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection  of
           the country of his nationality."

            UNHCR  Cessation  Guidelines  provide  that  for  the  Cessation
      Clause to be applicable, the changes in  an  individual's  country  of
      origin must be "fundamental  and  durable".   Article  11  of  Council
      Directive 2004/84/EC (the Qualification Directive) provides  that  the
      changes must be "of such a significant and non-temporary  nature  that
      the person eligible for subsidiary protection no longer faces  a  real
      risk of serious harm".

12.         Our attention was drawn to a letter dated 13 September  2017  in
      which the Respondent put the Appellant on notice that she intended  to
      cease/revoke his refugee status.  In relation to the Cessation Clause,
      the Respondent noted that the Appellant's refugee status was  obtained
      on the following basis:

            "11. As noted above, you were  issued  with  a  UK  visa  marked
           Settlement/Refugee in Hong Kong.  In your letter dated  26  June
           2017, you stated life was extremely difficult in Vietnam for you
           and your family.  You managed to escape from Vietnam in 1980 but
           you were caught by the Chinese authorities and detained for four
           years.  You managed to leave China and  spent  six  years  in  a
           United Nations Refugee Camp in Hong  Kong.   A  generous  person
           helped you to come to the UK.   After  landing  in  the  UK  you
           claimed asylum and you were given  indefinite  leave  to  remain
           (ILR).  The ILR was  renewed  in  2010  for  another  ten  years
           expiring in 2020.  There would be significant obstacles to  your
           re-integration to Vietnam as you have not been there since 1980.
            12.  By letter dated  1  September  2017,  your  legal  advisors
           Kadmos Consultants stated you fled Vietnam as a war deserter  in
           1990 at the age of 19 and you have  not  visited  Vietnam  since
           then.  You have no ties with your family in Vietnam.  If you are
           returned to Vietnam you will be destitute as you will not have a
           realistic prospect of finding a job at your age or  be  able  to
           maintain yourself through savings or support from  other  family
           members.  There is no system of social assistance that you could
           rely on."

13.         The Respondent thereafter  considered  developments  in  Vietnam
      since  the  Appellant's  departure.   The  Respondent  gave   specific
      consideration to the basis of the Appellant's original claim  at  [16]
      to [20] of the  letter.   She  noted  that  fear  of  prosecution  and
      punishment for desertion or draft-evasion did not amount  to  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution  in  and  of  itself  within  the  Refugee
      Convention and that Vietnam withdrew its troops from Cambodia in 1989.
       This was considered to be "a significant and durable change"  in  the
      situation for the Appellant in Vietnam ([17] of the letter).

14.         The Respondent had regard to a 2001 document from  the  Research
      Directorate, Immigration and Refugee Board,  Canada  at  [18]  of  the
      letter which reads as follows:

            "After the unification  of  South  and  North  Vietnam  in  1976
           thousands of people fled from Vietnam, many of them being  draft
           evaders and deserters.  In the Memoranda of  Understanding  that
           were signed between the Vietnamese  government  and  the  United
           Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees,  provisions  were  made
           about not persecuting those who returned  for  military  crimes.
           There are no  known  cases  of  returned  refugees  having  been
           punished for draft evasion or desertion,  although  it  must  be
           noted that reliable information  on  such  matters  is  hard  to
           obtain from Vietnam."

15.         The UNHCR provided its comments in  relation  to  cessation  and
      revocation by letter dated 6 April 2018.  Our attention was  drawn  in
      particular to the following comments:

            "It is the opinion  of  UNHCR  that  the  current  situation  in
           Vietnam as outlined below does not warrant  the  application  of
           Article 1C(5)  of  the  1951  Convention  on  an  individual  or
           collective basis.  Its application in this instance appears only
           to have been triggered by [CT]'s  criminal  convictions.   UNHCR
           notes that:
              i) The situation in Vietnam has not fundamentally and  durably
                 changed in the sense that would  permit  a  reasonable  and
                 well  justified  application  of  Article  1C(5).   It   is
                 important that the HO objectively discharges the burden  of
                 proof, by presenting material facts,  which  point  towards
                 and  demonstrate  the  specific  fundamental  and   durable
                 changes in Vietnam that warrant  the  application  of  this
                 provision; and
             ii) There must be a clear connection  between  the  fundamental
                 and durable changes being relied upon by the  HO  to  apply
                 Article 1C(5) and the  individual  circumstances  of  [CT],
                 addressing [CT]'s particular cause of fear and persecution.
                  UNHCR notes with concern that the HO  have  not  disclosed
                 the circumstances which led [CT] to being recognised  as  a
                 refugee.  UNHCR wishes to emphasise that the HO should take
                 further steps to obtain  additional  information  regarding
                 the circumstances under which [CT]  fled  Vietnam  and  his
                 recognition as a refugee.  UNHCR notes that it is  accepted
                 that [CT] was previously imprisoned in  China.   Therefore,
                 UNHCR urges the HO  to  consider  whether  [CT]'s  personal
                 profile or  history  of  political  affiliations  or  other
                 activity  may  put  him  at  risk  of  attracting   adverse
                 attention of the Vietnamese authorities."

16.         As we observed at the hearing, establishing  the  basis  of  the
      Appellant's refugee status may not be  straightforward  since  he  was
      originally  recognised  in  Hong  Kong.   Furthermore,  speaking   for
      ourselves, we would not make the criticism which  UNHCR  does  in  its
      letter, bearing in mind the passage of the September 2017 letter which
      we have set out at [12] above.  As is  there  indicated,  and  as  the
      Appellant and his advisers have put forward, refugee  status  in  this
      case was based on the Appellant's position as a draft evader/deserter.
       The UNHCR letter goes on to deal with that basis of  claim  generally
      and  concludes  by  urging  the  Respondent  "to  assess  whether  the
      circumstances which led [CT] to flee Vietnam and be  recognised  as  a
      refugee continue to exist on an individual basis, taking into  account
      his experiences".  The letter then moves on to deal with  the  general
      conditions in Vietnam.

17.         The Respondent revisited the issue of cessation  in  her  letter
      dated 24 May 2018.  Having re-stated the  contents  of  the  September
      2017 letter, she considered the UNHCR letter and representations  made
      by the Appellant's legal advisers.  Most of what is there said relates
      to the general conditions in Vietnam.  At  [40]  of  the  letter,  the
      Respondent said the following about risk on return:

            "40. It was shown in the letter of 13 September 2017 and  herein
           that although you left Vietnam as a war deserter, there  are  no
           known cases of returned refugees having been punished for  draft
           evasion or desertion, and consequently it is not  accepted  that
           you will be at risk from the authorities for having deserted the
           army or for having left the country illegally."

            The Respondent went on to consider background information  about
      risks to those opposed to the Vietnamese government but noted that the
      Appellant did not claim to have any political profile  and  would  not
      therefore be at risk on that account.  That  assessment  was  imported
      into the Respondent's decision under appeal.

18.         The Judge's consideration of  the  cessation  issue  appears  at
      [23] to [25] of the Decision as follows:

            "23. The Respondent maintains that it is not accepted  that  the
           Appellant continues to face treatment amounting  to  persecution
           on return to Vietnam as it has been concluded that the objective
           evidence indicates that  the  change  of  country  situation  is
           significant and durable  and  obviates  the  circumstances  upon
           which the Appellant  was  recognised  as  a  refugee.   In  this
           respect, I was referred to the (non-binding) UNHCR letter  dated
           6.4.2018 which urged, amongst other things, a full assessment of
           the Appellant's family ties in  Vietnam  and  obtaining  further
           information about the family ties of the Appellant in the UK  as
           well as stating that  the  Respondent  has  not  discharged  the
           burden of truth.  In relation  to  the  comments  in  the  UNHCR
           letter, the Respondent in its letter of  24.5.2018  stated  that
           there are no  known  cases  of  returned  refugees  having  been
           punished for draft evasion and desertion and it was not accepted
           that he would [be] at  risk  from  the  authorities  for  having
           deserted.
            24.  I was also referred to the  country  expert  report  of  Mr
           Christopher Bluth.  In respect of that report, I was asked by Mr
           Bassi to bear in mind that the report makes little reference  to
           the Appellant's partner and no reference to his sister  who  was
           said to be living in Vietnam by two of the Appellant's children.
            The report refers to the Appellant as having no family  network
           in Vietnam.  Mr Bassi also asked me  to  note  that  the  report
           stated  only  that  the  Appellant  "may  be  unable  to  obtain
           household registration and have difficulty accessing healthcare"
           [my underlining].  Mr Sellwood referred  me  to,  amongst  other
           things, the case of AMA (Article  1C(5)  -  proviso  -  internal
           relocation) Somalia [2019] UKUT 00011 (IAC) and  emphasised  the
           UNHCR letter and the comments in the report of  Professor  Bluth
           as to the risk of re-trafficking and the logistical difficulties
           relating to household registration.
            25.  The Appellant's witness statement of  21.6.2019  refers  to
           his sister having lived in the UK but having returned to Vietnam
           on holiday, becoming ill and still being there.  At the  hearing
           [JT] was asked whether her father  had  any  family  members  in
           Vietnam and she answered that he has a sister there who also has
           two children.  [CT] was  also  asked  what  family  members  his
           father had back in Vietnam and he answered a sister.  I  do  not
           accept, based upon the evidence given at the hearing,  that  the
           Appellant has no family members or family network in Vietnam and
           I find that his sister is living in Vietnam  with  her  children
           such that the Appellant would have  some  family  network  there
           which would be able to offer support to him and assist him  with
           some of the difficulties referred to in the report of  Professor
           Bluth.  I note also that the Appellant's partner has two sisters
           and a younger brother living in Vietnam by her own  account  and
           that, by the account of the  Appellant,  her  parents  are  also
           living in Vietnam although his  partner  sated  that  they  were
           deceased.  I find that the family members of Appellant's partner
           would also be able to offer support to the Appellant.   Overall,
           I do give some weight to  the  report  of  Professor  Bluth  but
           certainly not conclusive weight particularly as I consider  that
           it has not engaged as fully as it could have  done  with  family
           members of the Appellant and his  partner  currently  living  in
           Vietnam (as urged in the UNHCR letter)  but  simply  states  and
           bass some of its findings on the Appellant having no  family  or
           other ties in Vietnam which I do not accept  as  being  correct.
           Having considered all the evidence  on  this  issue,  I  do  not
           accept that the Appellant  would  face  treatment  amounting  to
           persecution or such that he would be  in  need  of  humanitarian
           protection based upon Article 3  grounds  (on  grounds  of  ill-
           health is considered below).

19.         We remind ourselves that the Appellant does not have  permission
      to argue that the Judge erred when considering cessation based on  the
      general situation and his family circumstances in Vietnam.   Given the
      detailed consideration given to those issues in  the  passage  of  the
      Decision cited above, it  is  unsurprising  that  permission  was  not
      granted on that ground.  Permission was however granted on  the  basis
      that the Judge  failed  to  make  any  finding  whether  there  was  a
      fundamental and durable change in relation  to  risk  and  to  provide
      reasons why such change had occurred.

20.         The Judge refers to the UNHCR letter at  [23]  of  the  Decision
      (cited above).  He was of course entitled to note that the  letter  is
      not binding.  When dealing with the issue of individual risk, however,
      the Judge refers only to the Respondent's assertion that there are "no
      known cases of  returned  refugees  having  been  punished  for  draft
      evasion and desertion" and therefore that a risk on that  account  was
      not accepted. He notes that the Respondent maintains  that  there  had
      been a fundamental and significant change such that  the  reasons  why
      the Appellant was recognised as a refugee  had  ceased  to  exist  but
      thereafter fails to make any finding whether that case is established.



21.         The Judge had before him a report of Professor  Christoph  Bluth
      dated  10  December  2017.   Professor  Bluth  is   a   Professor   of
      International Relations  and  Security  at  Bradford  University  with
      considerable knowledge  of  the  situation  in  Vietnam.    The  Judge
      referred to his report at [24] of the Decision (cited above) but  only
      in the context of the general situation in  Vietnam.   As  Judge  Gill
      noted when refusing permission on the renewed grounds, the Judge  does
      not take issue with Professor Bluth's report other than in relation to
      the general situation based  on  his  acceptance  of  the  Appellant's
      assertion that he has no family in Vietnam.  We note that the majority
      of the report is concerned with this aspect of  the  Appellant's  case
      and with trafficking.

22.         However, the Judge does not refer to those  parts  of  Professor
      Bluth's report which deal with the individual risk to  the  Appellant.
      In particular, Ms Pinder drew our attention to the following  passages
      from the report:

             "5.5.2      There  is  doubt  as  to  whether  the   Vietnamese
           government will permit the return of the appellant  to  Vietnam.
           This doubt exists due to the past  practice  of  the  Vietnamese
           government to refuse to permit the return of  persons  convicted
           of serious crimes.
                 ...
            5.5.9      If the appellant were to be returned, he  would  face
           interrogations by  Vietnamese  officials.   At  arrival  at  the
           airport in Hanoi or Ho Chi Minh City,  returned  Vietnamese  are
           interrogated by  immigration  officials.   Questions  are  asked
           about where  they  have  been,  their  activities  and  contacts
           abroad, their  reasons  for  return  and  their  destination  in
           Vietnam.   This  "self-statement"  amounts  to   a   form   [of]
           interrogation which according to  a  programme  officer  of  the
           International Organisation for Migration (IOM) in  Hanoi  occurs
           before they  go  through  immigration  and  can  take  an  hour.
           However, in the case of failed asylum seekers, the interrogation
           will be more thorough and take longer.  There is no  doubt  that
           asylum seekers (or returnees in general) will be  questioned  or
           examined about their  political  loyalties  or  activities  upon
           return.  Human Rights Watch observed that during  interrogations
           of  returned  asylum  seekers  from  Hong   Kong   to   Vietnam,
           immigration  officials  showed  particular  interest  in  asylum
           seekers  who  worked  with  foreigners  or   foreign   voluntary
           agencies,  or  engaged  in  anti-Communist  or  other  political
           activities.  In this particular case it  will  be  the  criminal
           conviction of the appellant that will attract the  attention  of
           the authorities.
            5.5.10     There is clear evidence that  failed  asylum  seekers
           can be arrested upon return for alleged crimes which can include
           anti-government activities.  A Country Report  on  Human  Rights
           Practices issued by the US State Department noted  a  number  of
           instances in  which  returning  Vietnamese  citizens  have  been
           mistreated by the Vietnamese government as a result of actual or
           alleged dissident activities and/or beliefs  were  "interrogated
           extensively by  authorities  upon  their  return".   The  report
           discusses an example relating to  "thirteen  potential  refugees
           who received UNHCR protection  in  Phnom  Penh",  and  who  were
           returned to Vietnam independently were "interrogated extensively
           by authorities upon their return".  Desertion from the  army  is
           an offence.  Under  the  Vietnamese  criminal  code  a  military
           deserter is liable to be sentenced to up to  two  years  of  re-
           education in a military punishment unit or can be imprisoned for
           a period from six months to five  years.   A  deserter  is  also
           potentially liable under the provisions of the military  service
           law, under which they can be imprisoned for six  months  to  two
           years.  In principle a person could also be tried  for  offences
           committed in another country  even  if  he  has  already  [been]
           prosecuted abroad.
             5.5.11      Prison  conditions  in  Vietnam  are  very   harsh,
           including for  those  arrested  for  their  political  opinions.
           Prisons are overcrowded, many of the prisoners are infected with
           HIV,  there  is  a  systematic  mistreatment  of  prisoners  and
           political prisoners are mixed in with violent  offenders.   Both
           the appellant's desertion from the armed  forces  and  the  drug
           offences he was convicted for in the United Kingdom are  capital
           crimes in Vietnam that can attract the death sentence.  There is
           a serious risk that  the  appellant  will  be  interrogated  and
           mistreated by the Vietnamese authorities.
                 6.    Conclusion
                 ...
            6.2  As a deported person who previously  held  refugee  status,
           the appellant  will  face  interrogation  upon  arrival.   As  a
           convicted criminal who left Vietnam before 1995  the  Vietnamese
           authorities will not consider that they are required  to  accept
           him and so it may not be possible to return him to Vietnam.  His
           deportation  may  also  cause  the  authorities  to  review  his
           desertion from the armed  forces  which  puts  him  at  risk  of
           serious ill treatment."

23.          We  do  not  view  the  evidence  of  Professor  Bluth  as   to
      returnability (based on lack of Memoranda of Understanding) as of  any
      significance to the revocation issue.  If the Respondent is unable  to
      return the Appellant, that may ultimately be relevant to an Article  8
      assessment but not to the risk on return.  We are in any event  unable
      to discern the source of Professor Bluth's assertion that no such  MOU
      exists between Vietnam and the UK.

24.         Neither do we view as  significant  Professor  Bluth's  evidence
      about the interest of the Vietnamese authorities  in  their  political
      opponents.  We can find nothing in the evidence to  suggest  that  the
      Appellant has ever claimed to have a political profile  or,  for  that
      matter, any anti-government views.

25.         We do however accept that the Judge has failed  to  engage  with
      Professor Bluth's evidence as to individual  risks  and  to  determine
      whether there is such a fundamental and durable change in Vietnam that
      the Appellant would be at risk by reason of the original reason why he
      was determined to be a refugee, namely because he was a deserter/draft
      evader.  The Judge has failed to mention the Cessation Clause; indeed,
      we are not clear from the Judge's analysis  that  he  recognised  that
      cessation of status was part of the  appeal  to  be  determined  (even
      though this was raised in the grounds  and  skeleton  argument).   The
      findings on the protection issue as appear at  [25]  of  the  Decision
      read as if the Judge was determining a  protection  claim  (where  the
      burden of establishing the risk lies with the Appellant)  rather  than
      considering  cessation  of  status  where  the  burden  is  with   the
      Respondent.

26.         As we observed during the course of submissions,  the  issue  of
      individual risk as a draft evader/deserter is not a  central  part  of
      Professor Bluth's report.   As we also pointed out, a  number  of  the
      sources for the assertions in  this  part  of  the  report  are  quite
      historic (mainly the US State Department report for 2005).   We accept
      though Ms Pinder's submission that the sources on which the Respondent
      relies are also old (2001).  We note  that  there  appears  to  be  an
      inconsistency between  what  Professor  Bluth  says  at  [5.5.10]  and
      [5.5.11] about the penalties for draft  evasion/desertion.   There  is
      little if any consideration of the extent to  which  prosecutions  are
      brought in that regard.  The Respondent's case is that  there  are  no
      known cases of such prosecutions.  However, Professor Bluth does refer
      to what appears to be a 2013 report at footnote [52] which relates  to
      deserters.  He does not say what that article/report shows nor were we
      shown a copy of  it.   There  is  however  no  consideration  of  that
      evidence by the Judge.

27.         Although we feel bound to comment on the paucity of evidence  in
      relation to the individualised risk as  a  draft  evader/deserter,  we
      remind ourselves that the burden of proof  in  relation  to  cessation
      falls on the Respondent.  We also repeat the point we make above that,
      in the context of a revocation of protection appeal,  a  determination
      of whether the Cessation Clause is satisfied  is  crucial.   For  that
      reason, we conclude that there is an error of  law  disclosed  by  the
      Appellant's ground two and that this error is material.  The Appellant
      is entitled to reasons why cessation of  his  status  is  appropriate.
      For that reason, we set aside the Decision.

Ground One

28.         As we began by saying, if we found for the Appellant  on  ground
      two, it would not strictly be  necessary  for  us  to  deal  with  the
      Section 72 issue.  If we had been against the Appellant on ground two,
      however, we would not have found an error on ground one.  We therefore
      need to consider whether it is appropriate for us  to  preserve  Judge
      Swinnerton's conclusions on this issue.

29.         As Ms Pinder fairly accepted, the OASys report contains  defects
      as identified at [20] of the Decision.   Although Ms  Davies,  in  her
      report, does explain why the OASys report may have been carried out as
      it was (given the difference in nature between the most recent offence
      and the earlier offences), the Judge was nonetheless entitled to  rely
      on the deficiencies in the OASys report and to give little  weight  to
      the assessment for that reason.   Ms Davies points out that  the  risk
      of reconviction scores in the OASys report were calculated before  the
      rehabilitative efforts (which the Respondents says can be given little
      weight because they have been made within a  controlled  environment).
      As Ms Davies also points out, there is reference to the earlier,  more
      serious offences in the report, but the later sections have  not  been
      completed because the more recent offence was not one  involving  risk
      of serious harm.  As such, Ms Davies' points  do  not  deal  with  the
      Judge's reason for giving little weight  to  the  report  because  the
      OASys report does not include a complete assessment.

30.         Furthermore, the Judge considered the risk of reoffending  based
      on the evidence recorded  at  [19]  to  [22]  of  the  Decision.   His
      assessment whether the  Appellant  has  rebutted  the  presumption  in
      Section 72 and has shown that he is not  a  danger  to  the  community
      therefore incorporates wider considerations.   The Judge was  entitled
      to reach the conclusion he did for the reasons he gave.

31.         Although we have reached that conclusion,  we  do  not  preserve
      Judge Swinnerton's findings on this issue.  We do not  do  so  because
      there is a later OASys report on which the  Appellant  seeks  to  rely
      dated 8 August 2019.  As such, it is appropriate for another Judge  to
      consider this issue on the most recent evidence.  We repeat the  point
      we  make  above,  though,  that  if  another  Judge  finds  that   the
      Appellant's refugee status  can  be  ceased,  applying  the  Cessation
      Clause, there is no need to go on to consider the Section 72 issue.

32.         Finally, we do not preserve Judge Swinnerton's findings  on  the
      human rights grounds (Article 3 and 8 ECHR).  Those issues are  to  be
      determined as at date of hearing.   Although  the  Appellant  was  not
      granted permission to challenge Judge Swinnerton's findings  on  these
      issues, it is appropriate that those be reconsidered based on any  up-
      to-date evidence on which the Appellant wishes to rely.

33.         For the above reasons, we find an error of  law  on  ground  two
      (the cessation issue).   We  set  aside  the  Decision.   The  parties
      invited us to remit the appeal in the event that we found an error  of
      law.  Although the error of law is found on a narrow  basis,  for  the
      reasons we have given it is not appropriate to  preserve  any  of  the
      findings.  In relation to the appropriate forum for the  re-making  of
      the decision,  we  have  given  careful  consideration  to  the  Joint
      Practice Statement of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal
      concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.   That  reads  as
      follows:


        "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
        proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
        the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
        that:-
                  a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party
                     before the First-tier Tribunal of a  fair  hearing  or
                     other opportunity for that party's case to be  put  to
                     and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
                  b) the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                     which is necessary in order for the  decision  in  the
                     appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to
                     the overriding objective in rule 2, it is  appropriate
                     to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

            Having regard to the failure of Judge  Swinnerton  to  determine
      one of the fundamental issues in this appeal, we  are  satisfied  that
      the appropriate course is  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for redetermination.

DECISION
We  are  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  of  Judge   K
Swinnerton promulgated on 5 July 2019 involves  the  making  of  a  material
error on a point of law. We set aside that decision.  We  remit  the  appeal
to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before a Judge other than  Judge  K
Swinnerton.
 Signed          [pic] Dated: 11 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

