
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00007/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ADNAN SHARIF MOHAMUD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Howard, Fountain Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   For the sake of continuity I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically this is  an  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal made by the Secretary of State.

2.   The appellant appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  24
    February 2015 to make a deportation order under section 32  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  On 28 July 2008 the appellant was convicted of  rape
    and conspiracy to commit rape and was sentenced to  a  period  of  nine
    years in prison. On 20 May 2013 the respondent wrote to  the  appellant
    to say that his liability to deportation had been  considered,  but  in
    the circumstances, the Secretary of  State  had  decided  not  to  take
    deportation action against him.

3.   The last paragraph of the letter stated as follows:

         "I should warn you therefore that if you should come to the adverse
         notice in the future, the Secretary of State  will  be  obliged  to
         give further consideration to the question of whether you should be
         deported. If you commit a further offence, and are over 18 years of
         age, the Secretary  of  State  would  also  need  to  consider  the
         automatic deportation provisions of the UK Borders  Act  2007.  You
         should be aware that under such  circumstances,  the  Secretary  of
         State may be legally obliged to make a  deportation  order  against
         you."

4.   On 6  January  2014  the  respondent  notified  the  appellant  of  her
    intention to cease his existing  refugee  status.   The  appellant  was
    granted leave in line with a cousin in 2002.  The  respondent  informed
    the UNHCR of her intention to cease the appellant's refugee status, and
    in the  decision  that  accompanied  the  deportation  order  dated  24
    February 2015, the respondent gave reasons for certifying  the  Refugee
    Convention claim under section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). The letter also  gave  reasons  why  the
    respondent ceased the appellant's refugee status under  Article  1C  of
    the 1951 Refugee Convention. The primary reason for ceasing his refugee
    status was said to be a durable change in circumstances in Somalia with
    reference to the relevant country guidance.

5.   The appellant appealed the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    appeal was heard by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Shaerf
    ("the judge") on 16 July 2015.

Procedural issue

6.   A procedural issue has arisen that requires me to set out  the  further
    chronology of events. On 23 July 2015 the judge promulgated a  decision
    allowing the appeal on "immigration" and  human  rights  grounds  ("the
    first decision").  Shortly after, in a decision  notified  on  28  July
    2015, the judge issued  a  notice  setting  aside  the  first  decision
    pursuant to rule 31 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  The  first  decision  was
    promulgated as a result of  a  clerical  error.  Another  decision  was
    promulgated on the same day ("the second decision").

8.   On the same day, 28  July  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  lodged  an
    application for permission to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against
    the first decision. Given the timing of the second  decision,  and  the
    application for permission, it is understandable that, at  that  stage,
    the Secretary of State had no knowledge of the second decision.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal on 7 August  2015.
    A renewed application for permission to  appeal  was  lodged  with  the
    Upper Tribunal on 19 August 2015.  It is  clear  from  the  grounds  of
    appeal that were lodged with the  renewed  application  that,  by  that
    stage, the Secretary of State had received  the  second  decision.  The
    grounds expressly applied to appeal against the  decision  sent  on  28
    July 2015.

10.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  21
    September 2015. It seems clear from the terms of her order that she may
    not have appreciated the fact that two decisions were  promulgated  one
    after another.  She found that it was at least arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal may have made an error of law because the failed to  make
    any findings regarding risk on return or in  relation  to  whether  the
    appellant met the requirements of Part 13 of the immigration rules.   A
    panel of the Upper Tribunal noted the confusion on 10 November 2015 but
    due to time constraints on that day the matter was  adjourned  for  the
    Secretary of State to consider the position.

11.  The matter came before me today to  decide  whether  the  Tribunal  has
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal.   After  discussion  with  both  legal
    representatives, who did not object to this course of action, I decided
    that the pragmatic way forward would be  for  me  to  make  a  decision
    within my role as a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal[1].  The  renewed
    application included an application to appeal the second decision dated
    28 July 2015. I can consider that application as a Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Given the crossover between the initial application  for
    permission to appeal and the setting aside  of  the  first  decision  I
    consider that there are grounds to justify extending time  in  relation
    to the application to appeal the second decision. For the same  reasons
    given by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker I agree that permission  to  appeal
    should be granted.

Decision and reasons

12.  The appeal relates to the second decision that was  promulgated  on  28
    July 2015. Both parties made  submissions  in  regard  to  whether  the
    decision involved the making of an error of law.

13.  The judge set out the procedural background to the case in some  detail
    in paragraphs 1-12 of the decision. At paragraphs 14-19 he recorded the
    submissions made by both parties at the hearing. His findings are found
    from paragraph  20  onwards  in  the  decision.   The  judge  correctly
    referred to the deportation decision being made under section 32 of the
    UK Borders Act 2007. At paragraph 22  he  noted  the  contents  of  the
    respondent's letter dated 20 May 2013,  in  particular,  the  paragraph
    that I quoted above, which suggested that no deportation  action  would
    be taken against the appellant unless or until he committed  a  further
    offence.

14.  The judge went on to consider the public  interest  considerations  set
    out in sections 117A-D of the NIAA  2002.  He  took  into  account  the
    serious nature of the offence and the progress that the  appellant  had
    made in terms of rehabilitation.   However,  at  paragraph  25  of  the
    decision he returned to the letter dated 20 May 2013. He found that  it
    created a legitimate  expectation  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    deported unless he came to the adverse attention of the authorities  at
    a later date. He concluded that that legitimate expectation went to the
    core of the appellant's private life and was sufficient to amount to  a
    breach of his rights under Article 8 of the European Convention.

15.   In  paragraph  31  he  concluded  the  decision  with  the   following
    statement:

         "This decision does not mean that the respondent is prevented  from
         reconsidering the appellant's refugee  status  in  the  context  of
         Article 1C(v) of the Refugee Convention if there has been a  change
         of circumstances in  his  country  of  nationality  such  that  the
         circumstances in connection with which he had been recognised as  a
         refugee have ceased to exist and he can no longer properly continue
         to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the  country  of   his
         nationality."

16.  There is no question that the  respondent  had  the  power  to  make  a
    deportation decision under section 32 of the UK Borders  Act  2007.  As
    such, it was incumbent upon the judge to conduct a full  assessment  of
    all the circumstances of  the  case,  which  should  have  included  an
    assessment of whether the reasons for ceasing the  appellant's  refugee
    status  contained  in  the  reasons   for   deportation   letter   were
    sustainable.

17.  In conducting a full Article 8 assessment it  was  also  necessary  for
    the judge to do so through the lens of the immigration rules: SSHD v AJ
    (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 & SSHD v AQ  (Nigeria)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    250.  While  the  judge   correctly   referred   to   public   interest
    considerations set out in sections 117A-D, at no point did he  consider
    whether the appellant could show "very compelling circumstances"  under
    paragraph 398 of the immigration rules, which was the relevant test for
    the purpose of this particular appeal.  The undoubted weight that would
    need to be placed on the public interest in deportation  needed  to  be
    balanced against the appellant's personal circumstances, which could of
    course include consideration of the letter dated 20 May 2013  in  light
    of the relevant case law: see Mehmood (legitimate  expectation)  [2014]
    UKUT 00469 and GC (legitimate expectation - entry clearance)  (Romania)
    [2005] UKAIT 0142.

18.  Although the judge was entitled to place weight on the letter from  the
    Home Office dated 20 May 2013 it was only one matter amongst  a  number
    of issues that needed to be considered for  the  purpose  of  assessing
    whether there were very compelling circumstances  that  outweighed  the
    public interest in deportation.  Unfortunately, the  fuller  assessment
    that was required was lacking in this particular decision.

19.  For these reasons I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error on a point of law and I set  aside  the
    decision.  With the agreement of both  parties  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law

I set aside the decision and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal


Signed   [pic]    Date 14 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
-----------------------
[1] Section 4(1)(c) Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007

