
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00014/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2020                             |On 18 May 2020                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                resul rahova
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Wood instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  who  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  29  December
    2017 to make a deportation order and revoke his  refugee  status.   The
    judge allowed the appeal on asylum grounds and under Articles 2  and  3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights  but  dismissed  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   I shall refer hereafter to the Secretary of State  as  the  respondent,
    and to Mr Rahova as the appellant, as he was before the judge.

3.   The appellant has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  October  2011.
    Following a successful appeal  against  a  refusal  of  asylum  he  was
    granted refugee status on 18 February 2012 with limited leave to remain
    until 17 February 2017.

4.   On 7 September  2016  he  was  convicted  of  conspiracy  to  supply  a
    controlled drug of Class A - cocaine, and dangerous  driving.   He  was
    sentenced on 14 October 2016 to five years and six months' imprisonment
    for the drugs charge and six months' imprisonment consecutive  for  the
    driving charge.

5.   The judge noted the sentencing remarks in respect,  in  particular,  of
    the drug conviction.  He also noted the earlier decision of the  First-
    tier Judge in 2012 allowing the appellant's asylum appeal on the  basis
    that he was at risk from a blood feud.  He had been found  credible  by
    the judge.

6.   The respondent relied upon the country guidance case of EH [2012]  UKUT
    00348 (IAC), with regard to  blood feuds, noting that it had been found
    that attestation letters from Albanian  non-governmental  organisations
    should not in general be regarded as reliable evidence of the existence
    of a feud.  A letter had been accepted by the judge in 2012 (the  first
    judge), a letter from the Peace Missionaries Union, as being authentic,
    and attached weight to it.  The  judge  considered  however  that  from
    reading the first judge's decision  as  a  whole  the  letter  was  not
    determinative but was only one of  a  number  of  sources  of  evidence
    relied on.  The judge also remarked that the respondent did  not  place
    before him any specific personalised evidence obtained  from  enquiries
    in Albania to the effect that the blood feud  between  the  appellant's
    family and the other family did not still exist.  The judge found there
    was no basis upon which to deviate  from  the  findings  of  the  first
    judge.

7.   The judge then took the findings of the first judge and applied the up-
    to-date country guidance in EH and concluded that the outcome would  be
    the same.  He considered that even if no weight were  attached  to  the
    Peace Missionaries Union's letter he was satisfied that  the  appellant
    would still attract refugee status.

8.   He remarked that the continued risks to the  appellant  were  supported
    by an expert report from Dr Korovilas.  No  substantial  criticism  had
    been made of that report by the respondent's representative.  The judge
    was satisfied as to the expert's expertise and attached weight  to  his
    report.  The expert had analysed the letter previously produced by  the
    Peace Missionaries Union and had concluded that there was  no  evidence
    to support the view that that  letter  was  fraudulent.   He  otherwise
    analysed the appellant's position and vouched for  the  fact  that  the
    appellant would be a likely target.

9.   The appellant gave oral evidence which was found by  the  judge  to  be
    credible and reliable.  His brother, who was now  an  adult,  had  left
    Albania and was also in the United Kingdom, and  the  only  other  male
    family member was his elderly father who had been in hiding in  Albania
    since 2010.  The judge concluded that  there  was  no  material  change
    which would render the appellant ceasing  to  require  protection.   He
    also observed that  his  finding  on  the  appellant's  entitlement  to
    refugee status was consistent with the respondent's Country Policy  and
    Information Note, Albania: blood  feuds  (version  3.0  October  2018),
    which relied largely upon a report published in  2017  by  the  Belgian
    Commissioner General for Refugees and Status Persons.

10.  The judge went on then to consider whether or  not  the  appellant  had
    rebutted the section 72 presumption: in other words was he disqualified
    as a consequence of his criminal  conviction  although  the  judge  had
    found he still required and was entitled to protection as a refugee.

11.  The  judge  observed  that  the  appellant  had  been  convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime.  Somewhat surprisingly he went on to  refer
    to the fact that it was not serious to  the  extent  that  anyone   was
    physically  harmed  at  the  point  of  the  appellant's  own  criminal
    behaviour; however he went on to note that the supply of drugs in  such
    circumstances was only one small component of a  much  larger  criminal
    underworld which involves exploitation, violence  and  that  ultimately
    when looking at the value of drugs involved,  hundreds  of  individuals
    lives would have been wrecked by misusing the drugs directly or being a
    family member of those who did and that the six year  sentence  imposed
    underpinned the serious nature of the offence.

12.  The judge went on then to consider whether the appellant was  a  danger
    now in the context of whether the presumption arising from  section  72
    was  rebutted.   The  appellant  said  that  his  involvement  was  not
    significant and he had never been involved in  such  criminal  activity
    before and had been motivated by financial gain to assist his family in
    Albania.  He had no  other  convictions  and  he  stated  that  he  was
    rehabilitated.  The judge considered that  the  appellant's  assertions
    that he was rehabilitated were  supported  by  an  OASys  Report  of  6
    February 2019 and which was supplemented by a stand-alone letter of the
    appellant's probation officer Ms Fairman.  It was said at  section  5.2
    of  the  OASys  Report  that  the  appellant's  convictions  were   not
    indicative of serious harm.  In  her  letter  of  15  October  2019  Ms
    Fairman referred to an Offender Group Reconviction Scale (OGRS), a tool
    to assess risk of offending in respect of which the  appellant's  score
    suggested that the probability of his re-offending was low.  The  judge
    went on to say that despite the very serious nature of the offence  for
    which the appellant was convicted, there was no up-to-date evidence  to
    show that he was a risk to the public or a danger to the community.  He
    was not assessed as a risk of re-offending and  he  was  not  a  career
    criminal and there was no evidence to suggest  that  he  had  links  to
    criminal gangs operating in the United Kingdom.   The  judge  concluded
    that the appellant had rebutted the presumption under section 72 and as
    such continued to be entitled to refugee protection.

13.  The judge concluded that in  any  event  on  the  basis  of  the  first
    judge's previous  findings  and  his  own  findings  now  even  if  the
    appellant failed to rebut the presumption under section 72 he would  be
    entitled to protection under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  He found no
    merit however in the Article 8 appeal and dismissed  that  but  allowed
    the appeal on asylum grounds under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

14.  The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal  on
    the basis that the judge had erred in respect both in  regard  to  risk
    the appellant posed to the public and also the issue of risk  he  faced
    on return and the findings in respect of the decision to revoke refugee
    status.

15.  Ms Cunha relied on and developed the points made in the grounds.

16.  As regards the cessation issue, the judge had erred at paragraph 28  in
    referring to the  absence  of  specific  personalised  evidence  placed
    before him from the respondent to the effect that the  blood  feud  did
    not continue.  It was not for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  put  this
    evidence but for the appellant to show that he was still  at  risk  and
    for the same reasons.  He had been nearly 18 at the time of the earlier
    decision.  With regard to what was said in KN [2019] EWCA Civ 1665,  to
    which I referred Ms Cunha, in particular at paragraph 36 where  it  was
    said that where a person had been granted refugee status  the  onus  of
    proving the circumstances in connection with which he was recognised as
    a refugee had ceased to exist  lay on the Secretary of State, Ms  Cunha
    argued that it  was  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  show  why  the
    circumstances of the grant of asylum as a child  in  a  blood  feud  in
    Albania existed but once the position had been made clear that  it  was
    different now and as he was an adult and had shown strength in  how  he
    conducted himself in the United Kingdom, he had to prove why on  return
    he would be at risk.   The burden on the Secretary of State was to show
    that the situation as it was at the time did not exist anymore and then
    the burden was on the appellant to show that it  did.   The  judge  had
    expected the Secretary of State to do what the  appellant  should  have
    done.

17.  Also, the judge had not  engaged  with  the  evidence  as  to  why  the
    appellant still felt he would not be protected  in  Albania  especially
    given his age, and things had  moved  on  since  2010.   There  was  no
    evidence of the feud being ongoing.  It seemed clear that the judge  in
    looking at cessation first looked at the earlier judge's  decision  and
    the situation had moved on and years  had  passed.   The  situation  in
    Albania now was an important factor.  The  judge  had  only  considered
    risk on return in respect of  the  expert  report  on  the  point  that
    endorsing the Peace Missionaries Union's letter that  had  been  served
    more than nine years earlier and was not  determinative  as  one  of  a
    number of sources of evidence before  the  first  judge.   Clearly  the
    judge had not based his decision on this letter  but  more  weight  was
    attached to it by this judge.  Although  the  reference  to  the  Peace
    Missionaries Union's letter was supported by the expert  that  did  not
    explain what part of the report showed that the appellant was  at  risk
    and why more weight should be attached to a letter  the  earlier  judge
    did not consider determinative.  The judge had not engaged with the age
    aspect of the case.  The appellant's father had  been  able  to  be  in
    hiding since 2010 and had not been harmed so why would the appellant on
    return be at risk?  No reasons had been given.  Matters of weight  were
    for the judge but he had to say why weight was attached and it was  not
    made clear why live evidence had weight attached to it and the evidence
    was not engaged with in the round.  It might have been different if the
    judge had found that there was an outstanding blood feud and  so  there
    was an ongoing risk, but the judge had just said that  the  appellant's
    claim was upheld and had not questioned aspects of the evidence.

18.  The judge had also failed to take into account the seriousness  of  the
    offence.  The fact that the appellant had been sentenced to  six  years
    for drug offences clearly showed the impact  of  that  offence  on  the
    public.  It seemed from paragraph 36 that the judge did not  understand
    the offence.  It was at least carelessly stated  and  put  the  judge's
    mind- frame in context.   There  was  no  consideration  of  it  within
    section 72 and the judge seemed not to engage with it.  As regards what
    was said at paragraph 40 about the OASys Report it was unclear why  the
    appellant's convictions were not indicative of serious harm.  There was
    no real consideration of why weight was attached to  the  OASys  Report
    and not to the sentence.  The judge had not engaged with the  facts  of
    the case.

19.  In her submissions Ms Wood referred to the fact that the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was based on what was said in EH about the letter  and
    more generally that  the  situation  of  blood  feuds  in  Albania  had
    changed.  This was relevant to the burden in respect of  the  issue  of
    fundamental and durable change.  It was of course appropriate to decide
    whether the appellant still had asylum  protection  before  considering
    section 72, contrary to what was argued in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    skeleton.

20.  The judge had noted the  earlier  credibility  findings  by  the  first
    judge.  The appellant was convicted of criminal offences but had  never
    given a false account and had pleaded guilty.  The respondent  had  not
    challenged the updating evidence referred to at  paragraph  32  of  the
    judge's decision about the family and the blood feud in Albania.  As  a
    consequence there was a proper consideration of credibility.

21.  With regard to cessation it was clear that cessation according  to  the
    UNHCR had to be used restrictively and there was a  high  threshold  of
    proof which was manifestly not met in this case.  The burden was on the
    Secretary of State  to  show  fundamental  and  durable  changes.   The
    Secretary of State's policy was clear that  the  reasons  for  being  a
    refugee must have ceased to exist.  Changes had to be  significant  and
    non-temporary.  It was said that things had moved  on  and  there  were
    fewer blood feuds and fewer areas in Albania affected but that was  far
    from enough to meet the UNHCR criteria in the letter of 20 August  2017
    where it was said that it was not a fundamental and durable change.

22.  As regards the  appellant's  age,  this  did  not  align  with  the  EH
    guidance or the CPIN.  He had been at risk as a young male  because  he
    was about to become an adult.  Under the Kanun rules  adult  males  are
    reasonable targets for a blood feud so he would be at risk as an adult.
     The expert had addressed this and said that he was more likely to face
    a threat in the absence of other males and the  self-isolation  of  his
    father.  His having been abroad  was  a  factor.   The  judge  had  not
    approached  matters  on  the  basis  of  giving  weight  to  the  Peace
    Missionaries Union letter.  The Secretary of State sought to  say  that
    the fact of the  letter  meant  that  the  appellant  should  lose  his
    protected status.  Letters could not be determinative in the absence of
    important evidence.  The judge had looked carefully at  how  the  first
    judge had approached the letter and the weight given to it and  how  it
    informed the overall decision.  There was no evidence that  the  letter
    was fraudulent and the expert had commented on this at page 13  of  his
    report.  The judge had considered how the  first  judge  addressed  the
    letter and how it sat with EH and how it  related  to  the  appellant's
    status and noted that it was not determinative and that it was  not  at
    odds with the guidance in EH.  The judge  had  said  that  even  if  no
    weight was given to the letter, on the basis of the Devaseelan guidance
    the first judge's decision would be sufficient.

23.  As regards section 72 and whether the presumption was rebutted, it  was
    noted that this  was  the  appellant's  first  offence.   It  had  been
    financially motivated.  There was a question as to why weight was given
    to the OASys assessment and the probation officer's report and that was
    because they were the assessments of the experts trained to assess  re-
    offending.  As regards the lack  of  weight  given  to  the  sentencing
    remarks that was argued for it was said that there would be risk at the
    time of offending but the question was what the  position  was  at  the
    time of the hearing.  Weight  was  therefore  to  be  attached  to  the
    sentencing remarks but as at the date of the  hearing.   The  appellant
    had been of good conduct in prison and was assessed as being at  a  low
    risk of re-offending.  There were also the  reports  of  the  probation
    officer and the OASys Report and the appellant's own assessment and  no
    factors indicating serious harm were ticked in the assessment.

24.  With regard to the points made in the  Secretary  of  State's  skeleton
    about the appellant clearly not being remorseful or rehabilitated,  the
    expert had commented on that, and the appellant  had  brought  numerous
    certificates to court also and gave oral evidence of remorse and it was
    also in his statements and there was the fact of the guilty  plea  too.
    It was clear that he understood and regretted his behaviour. There  was
    the reference to his nephew.  He had been released on 12  December  and
    there were no concerns of a criminal nature.  As to the  point  in  the
    Secretary of State's skeleton that he had not been released so he could
    not show rehabilitation, it was  true  that  he  was  not  out  in  the
    community to show that there were no  problems  but  he  could  not  be
    blamed for this.  Also, the Secretary of State's  skeleton  pointed  to
    the nature of the offence by the appellant so he could not be sorry, it
    could not be mutually exclusive.  Anyone could be  sorry  yet  seek  to
    explain.  As regards the argument that there was a failure to  consider
    the impact of the offences, paragraph 36 of the judge's decision was to
    be read as a whole.  He had considered the factors going  to  rebuttal,
    at paragraph 37 and any challenge was a matter of disagreement and  not
    one that identified an error of law.

25.  As regards the  points  made  about  relocation  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's skeleton and the weight to be attached  to  the  expert  report
    which included risk on  relocation,  the  first  judge  had  found  the
    appellant could not internally relocate.  Up to date evidence had  been
    given about his father.  He could not be required to  return  to  self-
    isolate in order to survive.  EH referred to the fact  that  there  was
    not yet a sufficiency of protection if there were an active feud.   The
    appropriate starting point was paragraph 40(i)  of  the  first  judge's
    decision.  The appellant had provided updates  and  the  expert  report
    also.  It had been noted in EH that there was a decrease in the  number
    of blood feuds and that was the only evidence of any aspect of  change.
    In EH it was said that the appellant  could  only  internally  relocate
    where there was no risk beyond the immediate area.

26.  By way of reply Ms Cunha  argued  that  her  main  argument  about  the
    burden of proof was as set out  at  paragraph  27  in  KF.   There  was
    therefore a burden on the appellant.  There was an error by  the  judge
    in that regard.  The Secretary of State had  to  show  as  set  out  at
    paragraph 6 and paragraph 16 of the judge's decision why  she  did  not
    believe the appellant would still be at risk and it was not a matter of
    reliance on the report in EH but taking the  whole  feud  into  account
    when considering the relevant issues.  It was relevant that the  father
    was in self-isolation in Albania.  The judge had  not  considered  that
    the opposing family might lack the funds or the ability to  pursue  the
    family and the father had been able to live in Albania and  to  contact
    his family.  The judge had not referred to the situation of  the  uncle
    in prison.  There was therefore a failure  to  counter  what  had  been
    shown by the Secretary of State and the judge had  erred  at  paragraph
    28.

27.  With regard to  relocation  Ms  Wood  had  expressed  the  matter  more
    clearly than the judge had.  The judge had not dealt with questions  of
    relocation or sufficiency of  protection.   The  weight  given  to  the
    report was  not  enough  to  detract  from  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.

28.  As regards the appellant's offence and the fact that  it  was  a  first
    offence and the weight to be given to that, there was an error of  law.
    It was not just  about  the  conviction,  as  held  in  cases  such  as
    Akinyemi, but what the offence was about.  The judge had  not  grappled
    with the significant  nature  of  the  offence.   With  regard  to  the
    rehabilitation point the Home Office skeleton was  not  so  much  about
    what it meant but that the judge in looking at  whether  the  appellant
    posed a risk failed to bear in mind that he was in prison at  the  time
    so he had had no opportunity to show rehabilitation.  It had  not  been
    said the appellant changed because of the courses.   He  could  not  be
    assessed as he had not been released into the community.

29.  I reserved my determination.

30.  I have considered first the cessation issue.  The following is set  out
    in Article 1C of the Refugee Convention :

         "This Convention shall cease to apply to any person  falling  under
         the terms of section A if:

         ...

         (5)  He can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
             which he has been recognised  as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of his nationality ..."

31.  It was made clear by the Court of Appeal in MM (Zimbabwe)  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 797 that a relevant change in circumstances  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 1C(5) might arise from a combination of changes in the  general
    political conditions in  the  home  country  and  some  aspect  of  the
    individual's personal characteristics.  It was said that  the  relevant
    change must in each case must be durable in nature.  In KN, to which  I
    have referred earlier, it was said, relying  on  MM  (Zimbabwe),  that,
    given that the respondent had been granted refugee status, the onus  of
    proving  that  the  circumstances  in  connection  with  which  he  was
    recognised as a refugee have ceased to exist lies on the  Secretary  of
    State.  She must show that if there are any circumstances  which  would
    have justified a person fearing persecution  then  those  circumstances
    have now ceased to exist and there are  no  other  circumstances  which
    would now give rise for a fear of persecution for  reasons  covered  by
    the Refugee Convention.  It is necessary, as set out at paragraph  339A
    of the Immigration Rules, that a person's grant of refugee status shall
    be revoked if the Secretary of State is satisfied that ...

         (v)  he can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
             which he has been recognised  as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of nationality.

32.  In my view it is clear from paragraph 36  of  KN  that  the  burden  of
    proving that the circumstances in connection with which  the  appellant
    was recognised as a refugee have ceased to exist lies on the  Secretary
    of State.  I do not consider that  the  judge  erred  in  observing  at
    paragraph 28 of his decision that the respondent had not placed  before
    him any specific personalised evidence gained from enquiries in Albania
    to the effect that the blood feud still exists.  The judge was entitled
    to rely on the combination of the findings of the first judge, and  the
    expert report which he had before him, the up-to-date evidence  of  the
    appellant and also the CPIN on Albania: blood feuds.

33.  In this regard, the judge noted what had been said in EH in  particular
    with regard  to  attestation  letters  from  Albanian  non-governmental
    organisations, and considered on the one hand that the first judge  had
    carefully considered the authenticity of the letter and did not  simply
    accept it at face value, but that also even if no weight were  attached
    to it the appellant would still attract refugee status, bearing in mind
    all the other evidence.  As a consequence, the judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude as he did that the cessation decision  was  unlawful  and  the
    appellant remained entitled to be recognised as a refugee in the United
    Kingdom.  As a consequence, at the very least,  the  decision  allowing
    the appeal under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR is upheld.

34.  It is however appropriate to go on  to  consider  whether  the  judge's
    conclusions in respect of whether or not the appellant had rebutted the
    section 72 presumption are sound.  Section 72(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  provides  that  a  person  shall  be
    presumed to have been convicted by a final judgment of  a  particularly
    serious crime and to constitute a danger to the community of the United
    Kingdom if he is (a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
    (b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  two  years.   At
    subsection (6) it is said that a presumption under subsection (2)  that
    a person constitutes a danger to the community is  rebuttable  by  that
    person.

35.  In this regard the judge noted the appellant's own evidence  that  this
    was the only offence he had committed, the nature of his motivation  to
    assist his family in Albania, that he had rehabilitated, and in support
    of that the OASys Report which concluded that his convictions were  not
    indicative of serious harm and the letter from Ms Fairman the probation
    officer referring to the  OGRS  tool  so  that  the  appellant's  score
    suggested a probability that his re-offending risk was low.  The  judge
    considered that there was no  up-to-date  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant was a risk to the public or a danger to  the  community.   He
    was not assessed as being at risk of re-offending and was not a  career
    criminal and there was no evidence to suggest  that  he  had  links  to
    criminal gangs operating in the United Kingdom.

36.  In my view it was relevant to make the points in the  grounds  that  if
    the appellant remains incarcerated he has not shown he would not  be  a
    danger to the community, but  it is also  relevant  to  note  that  the
    judge did not make a finding on rehabilitation  but  rather  noted  the
    documentary evidence and as he said an absence of  up-to-date  evidence
    to show that the appellant is a risk to the public  or  danger  to  the
    community.  That point is answered by the fact of the  ongoing  custody
    as argued by the Secretary of State.

37.  In my view the judge did err  in  his  evaluation  of  the  section  72
    rebuttal point.  The offence is clearly a very serious one, and  though
    there was evidence in the OASys Report and in  Ms  Fairman's  evidence,
    that needs to be balanced in ways in which the judge did not do against
    the seriousness of the offence which the judge  did  little  more  than
    refer to in the first sentence of paragraph 41.  As  a  consequence,  I
    find a material error of law in that regard.

38.  I invite submissions from the representatives as to  the  way  forward.
    I have found that the judge was not in error  in  allowing  the  appeal
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  and
    that he erred with regard to the exclusion point and in particular  the
    rebuttal issue.  It may be thought to be academic  to  have  a  further
    hearing in light of my findings on Articles 2 and  3,  but  I  am  very
    happy to receive submissions from the parties as to whether they  agree
    that it would be academic to reconsider the exclusion point or  whether
    the matter needs to be argued out.  The appeal is allowed to the extent
    set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed   Date 12 May 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

