

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  RP/00103/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 25 June 2019                               |On 18 November 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     S B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection and  child  welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is
appropriate to continue the order. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.



Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr A. Gilbert, instructed by Hersi & Co.
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  14  June  2018
    to refuse a protection claim, to purport to 'revoke' refugee status  on
    grounds of cessation, and despite asserting  that  refugee  status  had
    ceased, to certify  the  protection  claim  under  section  72  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002").  The
    respondent also refused a human rights claim.

2.    In a decision promulgated on 03 April 2019 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    A.H.M. Baldwin ("the judge") appeared to dismiss the appeal in  so  far
    as it was brought on Refugee Convention  grounds.  He  found  that  the
    appellant's refugee status had not ceased with reference to Article  1C
    of the Refugee Convention but concluded that the  appellant  failed  to
    rebut the presumption that he was a danger to  the  community  for  the
    purpose of section 72 NIAA 2002.  The judge allowed the appeal on human
    rights grounds with reference to Article 8 of the European Convention.

3.     The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  the  decision.  In  a   decision
    promulgated on 09 October 2019 (annexed) the Upper Tribunal found  that
    there was no error of law in the judge's findings relating to cessation
    with reference to Article 1C of the  Refugee  Convention  [10-20].  The
    Upper Tribunal could  not  ignore  a  Robinson  obvious  error  of  law
    relating to the way in which the judge assessed section 72  NIAA  2002,
    in light of the evidence which showed that the appellant  posed  a  low
    risk of reconviction [21-25]. It concluded that  the  judge's  findings
    relating to Article 8 of the European Convention were within a range of
    reasonable responses to the evidence and did not disclose an  error  of
    law  [26-30].  Having  preserved  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   finding
    relating to cessation and Article 8 the Upper Tribunal invited  further
    submissions on the remaking of the section 72 decision within  21  days
    [33].

4.    The Tribunal has no record  of  a  response  to  the  directions  from
    either party. Neither party has made a request for  a  further  hearing
    nor made any further written submissions on the issue of  remaking  the
    decision in respect of the section 72 certificate. I am satisfied  that
    the Upper Tribunal can proceed to determine the matter on the papers.

Decision and reasons

5.    The First-tier Tribunal findings  relating  to  cessation  stand.  The
    appellant continues to have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for
    reasons of his attributed political opinion. Article 33(2) contains  an
    exception to the general prohibition  on  refoulement  in  cases  where
    there are reasonable grounds for regarding the refugee as a  danger  to
    the security of the country  in  which  he  is,  or  who,  having  been
    convicted  by  a  final  judgment  of  a  particularly  serious  crime,
    constitutes a danger to the community of that country.

6.    The Secretary of State certified the protection  claim  under  section
      72 NIAA 2002. Section 72 is said  to  reflect  Article  33(2)  of  the
      Refugee Convention, although it inaccurately describes the  effect  of
      the provision as 'exclusion' from Refugee Status rather  than  framing
      the provision in terms of permitted refoulement. In EN (Serbia) v SSHD
      [2009] EWCA Civ 630 the Court of Appeal  emphasised  that  section  72
      must be read to comply with Article 33(2) of the  Refugee  Convention.
      It is important to note that section 72 came  into  force  before  the
      Qualification Directive and  is  expressly  intended  to  reflect  the
      provisions of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention and not  Article
      14(4) of the Directive.

7.    The Tribunal is  obliged  to  consider  section  72  NIAA  2002  where
      applicable. Section 72(10) was amended  to  reflect  the  new  appeals
      provisions. It states that the  Tribunal  is  obliged  to  dismiss  an
      appeal brought on grounds relating to  the  Refugee  Convention  under
      sections 84(1)(a) and 83(3)(a) NIAA 2002 if the presumption  that  the
      person constitutes a danger to the community has not been rebutted.

8.    The appellant was convicted in the United Kingdom of  an  offence  and
      was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  two  years.  He
      engages the presumption that he is a danger to the community  for  the
      purpose of section 72(3) NIAA 2002.

9.    I turn to consider whether the appellant has rebutted the  presumption
      that he is a danger to the community. The appellant was convicted  for
      his part in an organised enterprise involving deliberate road  traffic
      collisions to make fraudulent car insurance claims. He  was  sentenced
      to periods of imprisonment of two, three and five and a half years (to
      be served concurrently) for conspiracy to commit fraud. On 02  October
      2015 the sentencing  judge  described  the  organised  nature  of  the
      offences as follows:

           "This kind of offence is  prevalent.  This  was  in  my  view  a
           sophisticated,  professional  and  carefully  planned   criminal
           enterprise. It was dishonestly run in each of  its  compartments
           effectively and efficiently. The evidence demonstrated  that  it
           is highly lucrative and it has in some instances  understandably
           been impossible to calculate with any real  precision  the  true
           extent of the actual or intended financial gains. Suffice it  is
           to say that  the  financial  material,  the  evidence  the  jury
           received from the undercover policer officer and the general set
           up all indicate that this  was  in  its  separate  components  a
           number of fraudulent enterprises run on a commercial basis. Each
           necessary dishonest aspect of the framework was in place. It  is
           against that background that the appropriate sentences  fall  to
           be considered.
           .....
           I have already dealt with credit for plea where  applicable.  In
           [SB's] case I have taken into account  his  involvement  in  all
           three counts, his previous convictions an  aggravating  feature,
           and the principle of totality. ...
           .....
           [SB] is now, I am told, remorseful as he realises that he  could
           have caused injury to other road users."

10.   A copy of  a  print  out  from  the  Police  National  Computer  (PNC)
      discloses several previous convictions for offences  of  a  relatively
      minor nature  including  driving  without  insurance,  driving  whilst
      disqualified and failing to surrender. The offences were sentenced  by
      way  of  fines,  disqualification,  community  orders   or   suspended
      sentences.  The  index  offence  that  underpinned  the   respondent's
      decision to make a deportation order represented a serious  escalation
      in nature of the appellant's offending behaviour.

11.   The most recent OASys assessment was prepared  on  25  February  2019.
      The professional risk assessment prepared by an Offender Manager  from
      the National Probation Service (NPS)  noted  that  the  appellant  was
      easily led and went along with the plan when it was suggested to  him.
      He expressed regret for his behaviour but lack in depth  awareness  of
      the long-term impact of his behaviour on direct and  indirect  victims
      as well as the community in general. The OASys report goes on to  note
      that the appellant's antecedents had been confused with another person
      in the past. The records that the NPS had of convictions  relating  to
      the appellant prior to the index offence in  2015  were  (i)  a  theft
      offence in 2011; (ii) two offences relating  to  police/courts/prisons
      2008-2015;  and  (iii)  two  miscellaneous  offences   in   2007.   In
      considering whether there was an established pattern of offences,  the
      OASys report went on to say:

           "Mr [SB's] previous offending includes motor  offences  (Driving
           whilst disqualified) and theft, which  links  with  his  current
           offence also being a motor  offences  and  for  the  purpose  of
           financial gain. There is a clear pattern of his offending  being
           linked to him being dishonest  which  can  be  evidence  by  his
           current and previous fraudulent offences as well  as  his  theft
           convictions. When challenged about his reasons for his  previous
           offending, Mr [SB] was unable to identify his reasons for  theft
           from a person  however,  he  disclosed  that  he  [was]  driving
           without insurance because he was unable to afford it.


           In my assessment, Mr [SB's] index offence is  an  escalation  in
           seriousness from previous offending. Mr [SB's] index offence can
           be linked to serious harm to both himself and others as  serious
           physical harm can occur as a result of  his  actions.  As  such,
           future work will have to be undertaken to address this and in an
           attempt to increase his [victim] empathy,  financial  management
           and his thinking and behaviour."

12.   The report went on to note potential financial risk factors:

           "There are currently no current issues reported  concerning  his
           motivation or attitude towards employment however, at  the  time
           of the index office, Mr [SB] was employed. As his index  offence
           was solely for financial gain, I therefore  consider  employment
           to be linked to risk and re-offending. Periods  of  unemployment
           in the community could lead to feelings of financial frustration
           which will increase Mr  [SB's]  likelihood  to  further  offend.
           Should Mr [SB] be unable to obtain employment or loses his  job,
           I will be referring him to an ETE Advisor, who will support  him
           in his efforts to constructively occupy his time  and  help  him
           find employment.
            .....
           During interview Mr [SB] confirmed that his  index  offence  was
           committed for the sole purpose of financial gain  and  in  turn.
           Should Mr [SB] have limited or no access to  funds,  this  would
           heighten his risk of reoffending. In my assessment the financial
           issues are linked to Mr [SB's] offending behaviour and the risks
           of serious harm and this is an  area  that  has  to  be  closely
           monitored whilst he is in the community."

13.   The  OASys  assessment  noted  the  following  about  the  appellant's
      attitudes to offending behaviour:

           "During interview, Mr [SB] reflected on his  criminal  behaviour
           and feelings towards his previous offences as well as his  index
           offence were not right or justified at all and feels he has been
           wrong in all circumstances. He has positively identified that he
           has been led to offend  due  to  "needing  extra  money"  (index
           offence) or lack of finances (previous  offence).  Mr  [SB]  has
           stated that he wants to stop offending and his motivation is his
           family.


           Mr [SB] has indicated being very keen to co-operate in offending
           behaviour  programmes  and   evidence   reduced   risk.   During
           supervision, Mr [SB] has positively complied with all  offending
           behaviour work and  has  continued  to  show  a  good  level  of
           motivation  which  is  to  be  maintained.  By   continuing   to
           participate in offending behaviour programmes, Mr [SB]  will  be
           equipped further with the necessary  skills  and  techniques  to
           respond to challenging situation in a pro-social way, to reflect
           on his attitudes and lead life without re-offending."

14.   Having conducted an overall risk  assessment,  the  relevant  Offender
      Manager concluded that the appellant posed a 'medium' risk of  serious
      harm to the public because of  the  obvious  risks  arising  from  the
      nature of the offences,  but  his  overall  risk  of  reoffending  was
      assessed to be 'low'.

15.   The OASys assessment made clear that the main risk factor  that  might
      lead to reoffending was financial. The appellant says that he has been
      self-employed since his  release  from  immigration  detention  on  08
      August 2018. He wanted to work hard to support his family. He  runs  a
      used car dealership with his cousin. He produced  some  evidence  from
      his accountant to suggest that he is registered  with  HMRC.  Although
      there is little solid evidence of his income, even if the accounts for
      the period ending 05 April  2019  are  taken  at  their  highest,  the
      appellant's gross profit from the business was only �4,492. I bear  in
      mind that  the  evidence  indicated  that  the  appellant's  wife  and
      children were in receipt of benefits. The appellant  told  the  First-
      tier Tribunal that he also worked in a pizza shop  but  there  was  no
      evidence of the fact because he worked  cash  in  hand.  The  evidence
      indicates that the family is still likely to be living on a low income
      which is one of the potential risk factors  identified  in  the  OASys
      report. However, the appellant appears to be in work  and  the  family
      have other means of support to which his wife is entitled.

16.   The First-tier Tribunal judge heard evidence from  the  appellant  and
      his wife. He was satisfied that the appellant was genuinely remorseful
      for the offences and had time to reflect  on  the  significant  impact
      that his behaviour had on his family. The OASys report noted that  the
      appellant accepted  responsibility  for  the  offences  and  had  some
      insight into his offending  behaviour.  The  evidence  shows  that  he
      engaged with the NPS during supervision and was motivated  to  address
      his offending. The First-tier Tribunal judge  was  correct  to  attach
      weight to the professional risk assessment conducted by the  NPS.  The
      judge concluded that the appellant "is probably not likely now to be a
      danger to the public" [29].

17.   I bear in mind that the appellant was  assessed  to  pose  a  'medium'
      risk of serious harm to  the  public  if  he  did  reoffend.  This  is
      understandable given offences for  which  he  was  convicted  involved
      deliberately  causing  collisions.  The  risks  associated  with  such
      behaviour are obvious. However,  the  key  indicator  of  whether  the
      appellant poses a danger  to  the  community  of  the  serious  nature
      required to justify the  refoulement  of  a  refugee  is  whether  the
      appellant is likely to reoffend. Although the appellant has a  history
      of offending  behaviour  relating  to  motoring  offences,  and  still
      appears to earn a living through a business associated with cars,  the
      overall risk assessment made by a professional  Offender  Manager  six
      months after his release from detention, indicates that the  appellant
      poses a 'low' risk of reoffending. Like the  previous  judge,  I  find
      that the evidence does not show that the appellant currently  poses  a
      danger to the community of the serious kind  that  would  justify  his
      removal under Article 33(2). I conclude that the evidence produced  by
      the appellant is sufficient to rebut the  presumption  that  he  is  a
      danger to the community for the purpose of section 72(6) NIAA 2002.

18.   The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent failed to show  that
      the appellant's Convention status had ceased with reference to Article
      1C of the Refugee Convention. I remake the decision in so  far  as  it
      related to section 72 NIAA  2002  and  find  that  the  appellant  has
      rebutted the presumption that he is a  danger  to  the  community.  It
      follows that the  appeal  should  be  allowed  on  Refugee  Convention
      grounds.

19.   The removal of the appellant in  consequence  of  the  decision  would
      breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention.
      The First-tier Tribunal decision allowing the appeal on  human  rights
      grounds shall stand.

20.   The appellant has succeeded in his appeal on this  occasion.  However,
      he should be aware that if he commits any further offences, especially
      if they are of a similarly serious nature to the index  offence,  that
      it would be open to the Secretary of State to review the position both
      in relation to the Refugee Convention and/or the European  Convention.
      The appellant is expected to abide by the laws of the United  Kingdom.
      If he fails to do so,  the  outcome  might  be  different  on  another
      occasion. Only his future good conduct can ensure  stability  for  his
      family.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal  decision  to  ALLOW  the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds stands

The decision is remade and the  appeal  is  ALLOWED  on  Refugee  Convention
grounds

Signed   [pic]   Date 12 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan






ANNEX
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00103/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 25 June 2019                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                           LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. We find that it is appropriate to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
original  appellant  (SB)  is  granted  anonymity.  No   report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.



Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Mr A. Gilbert, instructed by Hersi & Co.
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, we will refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant (SB)  was  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  as  a
    refugee in a decision dated 18 September 2003. The  decision  was  made
    before the Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC) came into force  on  20
    October 2004. The appellant was recognised as a refugee with  reference
    to the Refugee Convention and was granted leave to remain based on  his
    'Convention status'. He was not granted 'European refugee status' under
    the Qualification Directive.

3.    On 08 October 2016  the  respondent  signed  a  deportation  order  in
    accordance with section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("UKBA  2007")
    following the appellant's conviction for criminal offences.

4.    The appellant appealed the respondent's subsequent decision  dated  14
    June 2018 to refuse a protection claim, to purport to 'revoke'  refugee
    status on grounds of cessation, and despite the assertion that  refugee
    status had ceased, to certify the protection claim under section 72  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002").  The
    respondent also refused a human rights claim.

5.    First-tier Tribunal Judge A.J.M. Baldwin ("the judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 03 April 2019. The judge's findings
    were not all contained under the heading "My Findings"; some were  made
    before that section of the  decision.  The  judge  noted  the  previous
    history of the case and the reasons why the appellant was recognised as
    a refugee  following  a  successful  appeal  [12].  He  considered  the
    evidence and gave reasons for concluding that the respondent had failed
    to discharge the burden of  showing  that  the  appellant's  Convention
    status had ceased [13-16]. The  judge  went  on  to  consider  evidence
    relating to the appellant's offending and made a finding at  [19]  that
    the evidence relating to his convictions  give  rise  to  a  rebuttable
    presumption that he is a danger to the community  for  the  purpose  of
    section 72 albeit the judge considered that he did not pose a  "'grave'
    danger" as argued on behalf of the respondent. Under the  heading  "The
    Oral Evidence" the judge outlined the evidence given by  the  witnesses
    [20-22]. At the end of this section  he  made  the  following  findings
    relating to the section 72 certificate.

                       "22.  ..... An  OASYs  Report  is  a  document  which
                 generally carries quite significant weight and there is  no
                 reason why this one should not do so.  There  is  no  doubt
                 that  the  offences  for  which  he  was  imprisoned   were
                 particularly  serious  but  the  question  is  whether  the
                 Appellant is probably still  a  danger  to  the  community.
                 Whilst I am persuaded that the  risk  of  him  re-offending
                 within two years is probably low and that he has "seen  the
                 light", as  it  were,  the  question  is  whether  he  will
                 continue to keep his eye on that metaphorical light  -  and
                 what will happen if he does not do  so.  In  assessing  the
                 danger he may present, I have also had regard to  the  fact
                 that this Appellant  is  not  one  who  went  adrift  as  a
                 juvenile, as his offending  did  not  start  until  he  was
                 around 30 and married. The risk of re-offending may be  low
                 but the question is whether he  remains  a  danger  to  the
                 community. The danger is not, I find, grave or great but it
                 is serious, present, genuine and not  fanciful.  Revocation
                 of his Refugee Status is appropriate and a  change  in  his
                 Leave to one where he will regularly  be  reminded  of  the
                 need to avoid  criminal  activity  should  provide  a  very
                 useful reminder of this." [emphasis added]

6.    Having dealt with the issues relating to protection  claim  the  judge
    turned to consider whether the appellant's removal  in  consequence  of
    the deportation decision would amount to a breach of Article  8.  Those
    findings were made under a subsequent heading  entitled  "My  Findings"
    [27-34]. The judge summarised general principles relating to the weight
    that must be given to the public interest in deportation. He made clear
    that "very powerful weight" must be placed on the public interest [28].
    He considered the nature of the offence and the length of the  sentence
    of 66 months. He also took into account evidence in the  OASYs  report,
    which assessed the appellant to be a low risk of reoffending within two
    years [29]. Because this was a case where the sentence was  over  fours
    years' imprisonment, the judge rightly took into account other  factors
    relating to the appellant's background as  a  refugee  and  his  family
    circumstances, including the  compassionate  circumstances  surrounding
    the care of his eldest child, who has significant difficulties  arising
    from Autistic Spectrum Disorder [30]. The judge assessed the  appellant
    as a witness and was satisfied that he  was  genuinely  remorseful  and
    that he had insight into the impact  that  his  offending  had  on  his
    family. He took into account the  fact  that  the  appellant  played  a
    significant role in the care of their eldest son.  He  noted  that  the
    appellant's son could be physically challenging and that this would  be
    difficult for the appellants' wife  to  manage  without  the  appellant
    [32].

7.    The judge went on to consider the interests of the other children.  He
    gave weight to the fact that there were four children who were  British
    citizens and found that it would be unduly harsh to expect them to live
    in Afghanistan with the appellant [33]. The judge recognised all  these
    factors had to be balanced against the nature and  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's offending. He noted that many  of  the  factors  would  not
    amount to very compelling  circumstances  if  considered  individually.
    However, he was satisfied  that  the  combination  of  the  appellant's
    family circumstances, the number of children affected, and the  special
    needs of the eldest child was sufficient to amount to 'very  compelling
    circumstances' which outweighed  the  public  interest  in  deportation
    [34].

8.    The Secretary of State's appealed the First-tier Tribunal decision  on
    the following grounds:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  follow  the  correct
          approach to the assessment of  cessation:  SSHD  v  MA  (Somalia)
          [2018] EWCA Civ 994 referred. The judge failed  to  consider  the
          most recent country guidance in AS (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan
          CG [2018] UKUT 118 in assessing whether the appellant would be at
          risk on return in Kabul as a result  of  an  incident  that  took
          place in 1996.

      ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed  to  give  sufficient  reasons  to
          explain why the appellant's circumstances outweighed  the  public
          interest in deportation and  failed  to  take  into  account  the
          possibility of  social  services  assistance  for  his  wife  and
          children: BL (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 357  referred.  The  judge
          speculated that the appellant's eldest son  might  be  take  into
          care and as to why the appellant might  have  received  a  longer
          sentence that his co-defendants.

Decision and reasons

Refugee Convention

9.    The appeal was brought on Refugee Convention and human rights  grounds
    in the context of an earlier  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order
    pursuant to section 32(5) of the UKBA 2007.

10.   The Secretary of State asserted that the appellant's status under  the
    Refugee Convention had ceased. The appellant's 'Convention status'  was
    recognised before the Qualification  Directive  came  into  force.  The
    grant of Indefinite Leave to  Remain  was  not  a  grant  of  'European
    refugee status' by a Member State under Article 13.

11.   One of the crucial differences between the Refugee Convention and  the
    Directive is that there is no provision for the revocation  of  refugee
    status under the Refugee Convention. Convention  status  either  ceases
    because of the circumstances surrounding the claim (Article 1C) or  the
    host state is permitted to remove a refugee if they constitute a danger
    to the community of the host state (Article 33(2)).  In  contrast,  the
    mechanism under the Directive is for European refugee status granted by
    the Member State to be revoked in both  circumstances.  The  effect  is
    that European refugee status comes to an end and the person may  become
    liable to removal.

12.   In the case of cessation, the practical difference between  Convention
    status  and  European   refugee   status   is   negligible.   In   both
    circumstances, the status under either provision comes to an end if the
    cessation criteria apply.

13.   The differences are more  pronounced  in  relation  to  removal  of  a
    person who poses a danger to the community of the host state. A  person
    may retain Convention status even if European refugee status is revoked
    with reference to paragraph 338A and 339AC of the immigration rules and
    comes to an end: see Essa (revocation  of  protection  status  appeals)
    [2018] UKUT 00244.

14.   Although the Secretary of State incorrectly purported to 'revoke'  the
    appellant's Convention status, when no such principle  applies,  having
    given reasons as to why the appellant's Convention  status  had  ceased
    this was sufficient for the purpose of the decision in  so  far  as  it
    related to Article 1C of the Refugee Convention.

15.   Having concluded that the appellant ceased to be  a  refugee  for  the
    purpose of Article 1C of the Refugee Convention it is unclear  why  the
    respondent decided to certify the case under section 72 when it is said
    to reflect Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention, which only  applies
    to removal of a person who is a refugee. Nevertheless,  in  so  far  as
    section 72 was relied on by the  respondent  in  a  'belt  and  braces'
    approach, the issue was before the First-tier Tribunal to determine.

16.   The Secretary of  State  is  right  to  point  out  that  the  judge's
    findings relating to cessation did not specifically refer  to  relevant
    case law. However, such an omission is insufficient reason to  find  an
    error of law if, in fact, the judge considered the issue  of  cessation
    in the proper way. In MA (Somalia) the Court of Appeal found  that  the
    assessment was broadly a mirror image of  the  assessment  of  risk  on
    return albeit the  burden  is  on  the  respondent  to  show  that  the
    circumstances in the person's country of origin are of significant  and
    non-temporary nature such that the person no long  has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution.

17.   The judge considered the documentary evidence, including the  evidence
    from UNHCR [13-14]. It was open to him to also take  into  account  the
    fact that the appellant is from  a  province  the  Secretary  of  State
    recognised still had significant insurgent activity. In light  of  this
    evidence, it was open to the judge to conclude that the  appellant  was
    still likely to be at risk in his home area [14].  The  judge  directed
    himself to the correct legal test [15]. He went on to consider  whether
    the historical nature of the appellant's original claim might  indicate
    that he was no longer at risk. However, it was open  to  the  judge  to
    take into account the high-profile nature of the incident described  by
    the appellant in which 26 prominent Mujahidin commanders  were  killed.
    The judge found that matters relating to 'honour' and blood  feuds  may
    become a legacy from one generation to the next. His finding was within
    a range of reasonable responses to the evidence relating to Afghanistan
    where such feuds and long held grievances are well documented.

18.   The judge went on to consider whether the appellant could relocate  to
    Kabul. Although it would have been helpful it he  had  cited  the  most
    recent country guidance in AS (Afghanistan)  (of  which  some  findings
    have subsequently been set aside by the Court of Appeal) it seems clear
    to us from what the judge says in the second half of [16] that he  was,
    as a matter of fact, considering the guidance. The undisturbed  finding
    of the Upper Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan) was  that  a  person  of  low
    level interest to the Taliban was not likely to be  at  risk  from  the
    group in Kabul. It seems clear from the judge's discussion of the  risk
    that the appellant might face in Kabul that he was aware of  the  issue
    because he said that he accepted that there was little or  no  risk  to
    low-level Taliban targets in Kabul. However, he then went  on  to  give
    reasons why the appellant "could hardly fit  that  description  despite
    him not having been a senior government or security  services  official
    or a spy". This  is  directly  paraphrased  from  the  guidance  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) and is further evidence that the judge assessed the issue
    with the country guidance firmly in mind. He went on to give reasons to
    explain  why  he  considered  the  incident  that  gave  rise  to   the
    appellant's fear  of  persecution  was  sufficiently  high  profile  to
    indicate that it was likely that he would still be of interest  to  the
    Taliban even in Kabul. He considered recent material  relating  to  the
    security situation in Kabul  and  concluded  that  the  respondent  had
    failed to show that the appellant no longer had a well-founded fear  of
    persecution in Kabul [16].

19.    The  Secretary  of  State's  grounds,  as  originally  drafted,  only
    asserted that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  MA  (Somalia)  and  AS
    (Afghanistan). The grounds expressed a general  disagreement  with  the
    judge's conclusion, asserting that the appellant would not be  at  risk
    in Kabul, without identifying any error of law in the  judge's  factual
    findings. Although Mr Lindsay sought to expand his  submissions  beyond
    the original grounds, we find that no error is disclosed. The judge was
    not seeking to depart from the country guidance. He accepted  that  the
    guidance stated that people who  were  of  low-level  interest  to  the
    Taliban were not likely to be at risk. However, he  gave  rational  and
    sustainable reasons to explain why  he  considered  the  appellant  was
    still likely to be of a higher level of interest to the  Taliban  given
    the high-profile nature of the incident he was perceived to  have  been
    involved in. The respondent may disagree with the conclusion,  but  the
    judge gave adequate reasons for his findings, which were open to him to
    make on the evidence.

20.   For these reasons we conclude that there is no error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  appellant's
    Convention status had not ceased under Article 1C. Those findings shall
    stand.

21.   However, at the hearing we highlighted  obvious  problems  with  other
    aspects of the judge's reasons relating to  Refugee  Convention  issues
    that could not be ignored. Both parties were given  an  opportunity  to
    respond to our concerns at the hearing.

22.   Section 72 of  the  NIAA  2002  is  said  to  reflect  the  provisions
    contained in Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  although  it
    inaccurately describes the effect of the provision as 'exclusion'  from
    Refugee Status rather than framing the provision in terms of  permitted
    refoulement. In EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  630  the  Court  of
    Appeal emphasised that section 72 must be read to comply  with  Article
    33(2) of the Refugee Convention. It is important to note  that  section
    72 came into force before the Qualification Directive and is  expressly
    intended to reflect the provisions of  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention and not Article 14(4) of the Directive.

23.   The Tribunal is obliged to consider section 72 of the NIAA 2002  where
    applicable. Section 72(10) was  amended  to  reflect  the  new  appeals
    provisions. It states that the Tribunal is obliged to dismiss an appeal
    brought on grounds relating to the Refugee  Convention  under  sections
    84(1)(a) and 83(3)(a) of the NIAA 2002  if  the  presumption  that  the
    person constitutes a danger to the community has not been rebutted.

24.   Our concerns regarding the judge's findings  relating  to  section  72
    relate to two points.

        i) First, the findings relating to the section 72 certificate  made
           at the end of [22] discloses a clear error  of  law.  The  judge
           found  that  the  appellant  was  still  a  Convention  refugee.
           Refoulement of a refugee would breach  the  Refugee  Convention.
           Article  33(2)  provides  an  exception  to   this   fundamental
           principle in cases where a person, having been  convicted  of  a
           particularly  serious  crime,  constitutes  a  danger   to   the
           community. Section 72 is said to reflect Article 33(2)  and  for
           this reason contains a presumption  that  is  capable  of  being
           rebutted by the refugee if he can show that he is not  a  danger
           to the community.


           The judge's unchallenged findings were that the OASYs assessment
           should be given "quite significant weight" and assessed the risk
           of reoffending within two years as low. Having accepted that the
           risk of reoffending was low it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
           appellant could still pose a danger to the community.  The  last
           line  of  [22]  (highlighted  above)  is  deeply  erroneous.  It
           discloses  a  misunderstanding   of   the   difference   between
           'revocation' of status and the circumstances in which removal of
           a refugee is permitted under Article  33(2).  The  test  is  not
           whether the appellant poses a threat that is "serious,  present,
           genuine and not fanciful", which seems to confuse the issue with
           the test for deportation under EU law and has nothing to do with
           the Refugee Convention. Nor is the application of section  72  a
           means of punishment to "remind" a person of the  need  to  avoid
           criminal behaviour. The confused and  somewhat  incoherent  test
           seemingly applied at the end of [22] amounts to an obvious error
           of law that we cannot ignore.

       ii) Second, even if the judge had not made the error in relation  to
           the correct test to be applied in  relation  to  the  rebuttable
           presumption contained in section 72 he erred  in  purporting  to
           allow the appeal "on asylum grounds" at the end of the decision.
           Section 72(10) obliges the tribunal to dismiss an appeal brought
           on grounds relating to the Refugee Convention if the presumption
           that the person constitutes a danger to the  community  has  not
           been rebutted. Having upheld the  section  72  certificate,  the
           judge erred in allowing the appeal "on asylum grounds".

25.   For these reasons we conclude that the judge's  findings  relating  to
      section 72 NIAA 2002 must be set aside. Further  directions  are  made
      below in relation to the remaking of this part of the decision.

Human rights

26.   We can deal with the challenge  to  the  judge's  Article  8  findings
      briefly. It is clear from the judge's findings at [28-29] that he gave
      significant weight to the serious nature of the offence and  the  fact
      that the appellant was sentenced to  a  period  of  over  four  years'
      imprisonment. Quite rightly, the judge considered the  fact  that  the
      appellant was given  a  higher  sentence  than  his  co-defendants  to
      reflect past offending and failures to respond to court orders.  There
      was nothing erroneous about this observation. It is not arguable  that
      the  judge  did  not  give  proper  weight  to  the  public   interest
      considerations or that he applied the wrong legal test.  It  is  quite
      clear  that  he  was  aware  that  the  test   of   'very   compelling
      circumstances' was a stringent test given  the  weight  that  must  be
      placed on the public interest in such cases.

27.   The Secretary of State's grounds outline  general  disagreements  with
      the outcome without particularising any errors of law that would  have
      made any material difference to the outcome of  the  judge's  decision
      relating to Article 8. The Secretary of  State  cannot  criticise  the
      judge for failing to consider whether social services might be able to
      provide the appellant's wife with support in bringing up five children
      in the appellant's absence, including one  child  with  a  challenging
      disability and then assert that the  judge  was  speculating  when  he
      concluded  that  there  was  at  least  some  possibility   that   the
      appellant's wife might not be able to cope with the eldest child and a
      risk that he might be taken into care. Clearly  the  judge  considered
      what other support might be  necessary  given  he  accepted  that  the
      appellant plays a crucial role in caring for a child with  challenging
      behavioural difficulties.

28.   It was open to the judge, and indeed he was obliged, to  consider  the
      best interests of four British  children.  The  appellant's  wife  was
      pregnant with their fifth child at the date of the hearing. The  judge
      made clear that none of the individual factors  would  be  sufficient,
      taken alone, but it was open to him to conclude that  the  combination
      of factors presented a picture that was capable  of  amount  to  'very
      compelling circumstances'. His approach  accorded  with  the  guidance
      given by the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan)  v  SSHD  [2016]  WLR(D)
      662. The respondent  disagrees  with  the  outcome,  but  the  judge's
      findings were within a range of reasonable responses to the evidence.

29.   Although the judge did not  take  it  into  account  as  part  of  his
      overall assessment under Article 8, we note that his finding that  the
      appellant continued to be at risk on return to Afghanistan would  also
      have been relevant to  an  assessment  of  whether  there  were  'very
      compelling  circumstances'  to  outweigh  the   public   interest   in
      deportation in the absence of any specific finding relating to Article
      3 of the European Convention.

30.   We conclude that the First-tier Tribunal findings relating to  Article
      8 did not involve the making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  The
      findings shall stand.

Conclusion

31.   The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of  errors
      of law in relation to the findings regarding (i)  cessation  and  (ii)
      Article 8. The decision shall stand in relation to those two issues.

32.   The First Tier Tribunal decision involved the making of errors of  law
      in relation to the  findings  regarding  section  72  NIAA  2002.  The
      decision is set aside in relation to that issue and will be remade.

DIRECTIONS

33.   We are conscious of the  fact  that  we  did  not  invite  submissions
      regarding the remaking the section 72 decision at the hearing and  for
      this reason it is necessary to do so now. There was  no  challenge  to
      the factual  finding  that  the  appellant  presents  a  low  risk  of
      reoffending. It is possible that the matter could be dealt with by way
      of written submissions. To that end we make the following directions.

        i) The parties are invited to make written  submissions  solely  in
           relation to the remaking  of  the  decision  with  reference  to
           section 72 NIAA 2002 within 21 days of the date this decision is
           sent.

       ii) The parties are at liberty to  apply  for  a  hearing  for  oral
           submissions to be made if considered necessary.

      iii) If no further submissions are made within  the  time  limit  the
           Upper Tribunal will proceed to remake that part of the  decision
           without a hearing on the evidence as it currently stands.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision will be remade solely in relation to section 72 NIAA 2002


Signed   [pic]   Date   07 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan














