
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00132/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th August 2020                          |On 1st October 2020           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     MS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

An anonymity direction has been  made  previously.   As  the  appeal  raises
matters regarding a claim for international protection,  it  is  appropriate
for an anonymity direction to be made.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family.  This direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


 1. The appeal was listed before me  as  a  resumed  hearing  following  my
    decision promulgated on 30th April 2020 setting aside the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke promulgated on 29th May 2019.  A  copy
    of my error of law decision is attached for ease of reference. In  this
    decision, I continue to refer to MS as the appellant and  the  SSHD  as
    the respondent.   I preserved the finding  by  Judge  Clarke  that  the
    appellant has rebutted the presumption that  he  is  a  danger  to  the
    community for the purposes of s72 Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.


 2. The hearing before me on 11th August 2020 took the  form  of  a  remote
    hearing using skype for business. The appellant was able to attend  the
    hearing remotely but was not called to give  evidence.   Neither  party
    objected. I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the  hearing
    room and building were open to the public.  The  hearing  was  publicly
    listed, and I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the  same
    way as I would have been, if  the  parties  had  attended  the  hearing
    together.  I was satisfied: that this constituted  a  hearing  in  open
    court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no  party
    has  been  prejudiced;  and  that,  insofar  as  there  has  been   any
    restriction on a right or interest, it is justified  as  necessary  and
    proportionate. I was satisfied that it was in the interests of  justice
    and in accordance with the  overriding  objective  to  proceed  with  a
    remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions  against
    the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I  was  satisfied  that  a
    remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and  justly
    in a way that is proportionate to  the  importance  of  the  case,  the
    complexity of the issues that arise,  and  the  anticipated  costs  and
    resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing  I  was  satisfied
    that  both  parties  had  been  able  to  participate  fully   in   the
    proceedings.


 3. In readiness  for  the  hearing  the  appellant's  representatives  had
    prepared a consolidated  appellant's  bundle  comprising  of  some  211
    pages.  The bundle had not been received by the Tribunal prior  to  the
    hearing, but Mr Holt was able to email a copy to the Tribunal and refer
    to it during the course of the hearing.  The majority of  the  material
    within the consolidated bundle was the evidence and background material
    that  was  previously  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  bundle
    contained some further background material, and  more  importantly,  an
    expert report from Hazel Cameron dated 3rd August 2020,  that  I  shall
    return to in the course of this decision.  For  the  avoidance  of  any
    doubt, I  have  carefully  considered  the  evidence  set  out  in  the
    consolidated bundle, including the witness  statements  and  background
    material, whether expressly referred to in this decision or not.


The issues


 4. The issue before me is whether the appellant  has,  as  the  respondent
    contends, ceased to be a refugee.  If he has, whether  the  deportation
    of the appellant would be in breach of Article 8.


 5. At the resumed hearing before me, the parties focused entirely upon the
    question of 'cessation'.


The Background


 6. The appellant arrived in  the  UK  in  February  2004,  aged  14,  with
    indefinite leave to enter for family reunion to join his  mother.   The
    appellant's mother arrived in the UK in March 2002 and claimed  asylum.
    She was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  refugee  on  13th
    September 2002 following a successful appeal.  In her  decision  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Clarke summarised the position as follows:


         "25.      The  appellant's  family  home  is  near  Bulawayo.  The
         appellant's status in the United Kingdom is linked to his  mother's
         status as a refugee in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  her
         political opinion. The appellant's mother was granted asylum on the
         basis that she was a  supporter  of  the  Movement  for  Democratic
         Change ('MDC') and it was accepted at the time of  her  application
         for asylum that even low-level MDC supporters were likely to be  at
         risk."


 7. I pause to note that  although  the  appellant  appears  to  have  been
    granted indefinite leave to enter the  UK  on  the  grounds  of  family
    reunion with his mother, the respondent has throughout  proceeded  upon
    the basis, and appears to accept, that a grant of  refugee  status  was
    made to the appellant.  It is not clear from the information before  me
    when such a grant of refugee status was indeed made to the appellant.


 8. In SSHD v- JS (Uganda) [2020] Imm. A.R 258, the Court of  Appeal  held,
    at [126] to [147], that the status of 'refugee' under Article 1A of the
    Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 can only be accorded
    to a person who themselves had a well-founded fear of being persecuted,
    not one derived from or dependent on another person.  If the  appellant
    is not a refugee as set out  in  Article  1A  of  the  1951  Convention
    Relating to the Status of Refugees, the cessation provisions set out in
    Article 1C(5) have no relevance.  As far as I can see from  the  papers
    before me, there is no express reference to the appellant  having  been
    granted refugee status himself.  The correspondence and decisions  sent
    to  the  appellant  refer  to  the  grant  of  refugee  status  to  the
    appellant's  mother  and  record  that  on  13th  January   2004,   the
    appellant's Zimbabwean passport was endorsed with a multi-visit  family
    reunion Visa with indefinite leave to enter  the  UK.   The  subsequent
    correspondence and decisions imply that the appellant has been  granted
    refugee status.  It forms no part of the respondent's  case  before  me
    that  the  appellant  was  not  granted  refugee  status  or  that  the
    respondent has mistakenly proceeded upon the premise that the appellant
    has refugee status.


 9. Since his arrival in the UK the appellant has been convicted  on  three
    occasions.  On 27th  November  2007,  he  was  convicted  at  Leicester
    Magistrates Court of using threatening,  abusive,  insulting  words  or
    behaviour with intent to cause fear or provocation of violence. He  was
    given a conditional discharge and ordered to pay  costs  of  �300.   On
    16th August 2010, he was convicted of possession of a controlled drug -
    Class B - cannabis/cannabis  resin  and  of  failing  to  surrender  to
    custody at an appointed time. He was fined �175, and ordered to  pay  a
    victim surcharge and costs.  On  11th  June  2012,  the  appellant  was
    convicted at Leicester Crown Court of Robbery, and, on  28th  September
    2012 he was sentenced to  an  8-year  term  of  imprisonment.   In  his
    sentencing remarks, His Honour Judge Pert QC said:


         "I have to sentence on your plea  of  guilty  for  an  offence  of
         robbery. You and another man went into someone else's home late  at
         night where the occupant and two other people were present. You and
         your accomplice were armed. It was plainly a  planned  intervention
         by you.... it matters not in the slightest who did  what.  You  had
         between you an extendable baton and a knife.


         It was also planned, because of what you perceived to be available
         in the premises because immediately,  the  occupant  was  asked  to
         identify the whereabouts of the safe and then the contents  of  the
         safe were taken and shared out, stolen  and  he  was  prevented  at
         knifepoint from leaving the apartment.


         You have to your advantage  the  fact  that  you  do  not  have  a
         particularly bad record. You have  to  your  advantage  a  plea  of
         guilty. The benefit of that has been  significantly  diminished  by
         the fact that you conducted or you had conducted on your  behalf  a
         Newton Hearing, which was an utterly  hopeless  venture  from  your
         point of view and you did yourself no favours at  all  by  pursuing
         that course, but it nonetheless still affords you some  credit  for
         your plea of guilty.


         It cannot be  stressed  highly  enough,  indeed,  the  Lord  Chief
         Justice has referred to it again yesterday,  the  sanctity  of  the
         home and the intervention in someone else's  home,  particularly  a
         violent intervention, and armed intervention such as occurred here,
         and that is the context in which I have to deal with  you  for  the
         offence of robbery.


         Had the matter gone to trial, without a shadow  of  a  doubt,  the
         sentence would have been one of 10 years imprisonment at  least.  I
         will accede to Mr Cox's submission and reduce that by 20 per  cent,
         not because I regard that as the appropriate reduction in all cases
         where a Newton Hearing had been conducted  and  lost,  but  in  the
         particular circumstances of your case I will do it, which takes the
         sentence down to 8 years imprisonment and that is the sentence that
         I pass."


10. The appellant appealed against the sentence but  permission  to  appeal
    was refused by the Court of Appeal on 19th March 2013.  Following  that
    conviction for robbery, the  appellant  was  invited  to  set  out  any
    reasons he relied upon as to why he should not be deported from the UK.
    The appellant claimed his removal would  be  in  breach  of  his  human
    rights and in breach of the Refugee Convention.


11. On 26th March 2015, the appellant  was  notified  of  the  respondent's
    intention to cease his refugee status.  No representations were made in
    response by the appellant.  The UNHCR made representations in  relation
    to the proposed cessation by letter dated 3rd  July  2015.   The  UNHCR
    referred to the country guidance relied upon  by  the  respondent,  and
    based upon other background material, urged the respondent to carefully
    consider whether the appellant may be at risk of harm  if  returned  to
    Zimbabwe. The respondent was urged to assess  whether  fundamental  and
    durable changes have indeed occurred in Zimbabwe.


12. On 12th May 2016, the  appellant's  refugee  status  ceased.   On  16th
    August 2016, the respondent made a decision to refuse  a  human  rights
    claim made by the appellant and to deport the appellant.


The evidence


13. The appellant has made three witness statements.  The first  dated  1st
    May 2014 (pages 1 - 8 of the consolidated  bundle),  the  second  dated
    23rd March 2017 (pages 9 - 13 of the consolidated bundle) and the third
    dated 18th February 2019 (pages 14 - 17 of the consolidated bundle).


14. In his first  statement  the  appellant  confirms  that  following  his
    mother's departure from Zimbabwe he continued to live with his  father,
    sisters and brother. He confirms that when he  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    February 2004, aged 12, his father remained in  Zimbabwe.   His  father
    died in early 2012 and the appellant went to Zimbabwe for five days for
    the burial. The appellant states that he stayed in a hotel as there was
    no family home or family in Zimbabwe to reside with. He is scared about
    the thought of having to return to Zimbabwe.   The  appellant  believes
    that he will be in trouble because of the  political  issues  that  his
    mother had before she left  Zimbabwe.   In  his  third  statement,  the
    appellant states that he has been watching the news regarding what  has
    happened in Zimbabwe.  He claims there would be a language barrier  and
    that Zimbabwe has not changed since the government has changed. He  has
    no idea what he would do there.  The appellant was not called  to  give
    evidence before me.  Mr Holt submitted that broadly put, the  appellant
    has a subjective fear that he will be at risk upon return because of an
    imputed political opinion.   Mrs  Aboni  confirmed  that  she  did  not
    challenge  the  appellant's  subjective  fear,  but  will  submit   the
    subjective fear is not objectively well-founded.


15. In her statement dated 26th October 2014, the appellant's mother, [EN],
    states that she did not agree with the regime  that  was  in  power  in
    Zimbabwe at the time.  As a result of her activities, her life  was  at
    risk and she had to flee the country and  she  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in March 2002. She confirms her children  remained  with  their
    father in Zimbabwe and after she was granted refugee status,  she  made
    applications for her children to join  her  under  the  family  reunion
    provisions. She first made an application for  her  daughter  and  when
    that application was successful, she made similar applications for  her
    three remaining children. She confirms the appellant arrived in the  UK
    on 21st February 2004.   She  confirms  that  at  the  age  of  19  the
    appellant moved out of the family home into his own flat in  Leicester.
    She continued to see the appellant regularly and she states that as her
    eldest son, the appellant assumed a 'father' role in the household  and
    everyone looked to him  for  guidance  and  support.  She  was  unaware
    initially about the problems the appellant had "with the  police",  and
    she felt lost when she heard that the appellant had been  sentenced  to
    an eight-year term of imprisonment.  She confirms that the  appellant's
    father died in 2012 and the appellant flew to Zimbabwe  to  attend  the
    funeral.  She states that the appellant did not stop  in  Zimbabwe  and
    did not explore the country.  She claims the appellant has  nothing  to
    return to in Zimbabwe, and there is no one left  in  Zimbabwe  to  help
    him. She claims she does not have  anyone  in  Zimbabwe,  there  is  no
    family home and the appellant has nowhere to go.  In her second witness
    statement [EN] confirms that she was a local town chairperson  for  the
    MDC and her role was to talk to people about how things  could  change.
    She claims she gave many speeches at events but also to people  in  the
    street and it was because of her activities that she  was  'wanted'  by
    Zanu PF.  She states that it is because of her role  in  politics  that
    she is afraid for her son because the families of  those  involved  are
    also  targeted.  She  confirms  that  the  family  is  originally  from
    Bulawayo, but that is not a place that the appellant is  familiar  with
    now.  She confirms the appellant "is not political", but if Zanu PF see
    him there, they will suspect him because of his accent and  because  he
    has not lived in Zimbabwe for some time.  She  believes  the  appellant
    will be perceived as a spy and once it becomes known that the appellant
    is connected to her, he will be in even more  danger.  She  claims  the
    appellant could not live elsewhere in Zimbabwe because he does not know
    anyone and they have no property or anyone to turn to for help.


16. There are also  before  me,  two  statements  made  by  [CS],  and  two
    statements made by [MS], the appellant's  sisters.   There  is  also  a
    statement made by [NS], the appellant's brother.   They  refer  to  the
    close relationship that they enjoy with the appellant  and  the  impact
    the appellant's removal will have upon the family. [CS] states  in  her
    second statement:


         "The only contact we have had with Zimbabwe since we came  to  the
         UK is when we went to Zimbabwe as a family in 2015. This  was  only
         because we wanted to show our youngest sister the location  of  our
         father's grave. We did not stay in Zimbabwe, but  had  a  hotel  in
         South Africa. We had made very  careful  plans  beforehand  but  we
         still had to bribe people at the airport  to  get  entry  into  the
         country. I worry that, if [the appellant] is not able to  pay  when
         asked to, he might face danger of being mistreated  or  even  being
         sent to jail.  When we  went  there,  we  were  not  recognised  as
         Zimbabweans. We were laughed at because of our accents."


17. The appellant's sister [MS] confirms she has been back to Zimbabwe once
    in 2015 for 10 days to visit her father's grave.  She states:


         "The only time I have been back, we faced problems at the  airport
         and because we have British passports  they  were  trying  to  take
         money and belongings from us and we have to pay. We were there  for
         a good few hours trying to sort things out."


     18. In his statement, [NS] states:


         "8.  Personally, I do not know that much about Zimbabwe.  The  last
             time I was there was in 2015 with my sisters for  a  visit  to
             our father's grave. We only went there for a few days.  I  was
             treated terribly at  the  airport  because  I  had  a  British
             passport. We as a family were not recognised as Zimbabweans.


         ...


         11.  When I visited Zimbabwe, we had no family to help us so it was
             my sister, Cindi, who told us how to go on.  The  airport  was
             scary because we were questioned quite  heavily.  Luckily,  we
             managed to pay and get out of there but if  we  had  not  paid
             then I hate to think what might have happened.".


19. The appellant relies upon a report by Dr Hazel Margaret Cameron, a full-
    time lecturer within the School of International Relations,  University
    of St Andrews, whose area of academic expertise is in Rwandan,  Ugandan
    and Zimbabwean social  and  political  matters.   Since  1999  she  has
    undertaken intensive study of Zimbabwean affairs including fieldwork in
    Zimbabwe and its bordering nations, investigating cycles of violence in
    the country throughout history. Her most  recent  Zimbabwean  fieldwork
    was between October and November 2019. Dr Cameron was instructed by the
    appellant's representatives to address the risks the appellant may face
    upon his return to Zimbabwe as a result of current political and socio-
    economic  conditions,  including  the  risks  of  the  appellant  being
    required to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF on his return. She sets  out
    a brief summary of her findings and opinions at the  beginning  of  her
    report at [A] to [O]. It serves no purpose  to  recite  each  of  those
    conclusions in this decision, but I will return to some of the opinions
    expressed in the course of this decision. At section 2 of  her  report,
    Dr Cameron summarises the relevant factual matrix.  She  addresses  the
    political country conditions in Zimbabwe at section 3  of  her  report,
    drawing upon relevant background material particularly in  relation  to
    events between 2017 and 2020.  At section 4 of her report,  Dr  Cameron
    addresses the position the appellant would find himself in, upon return
    to Zimbabwe.  In section 5 of her  report,  Dr  Cameron  addresses  the
    socio-economic conditions in Zimbabwe as they now are.  I stress that I
    have carefully considered her report, and the matters set  out  in  the
    report that lead to her conclusions and the opinions expressed by  her,
    whether directly referred to in this decision or not.  It would  simply
    be impractical for me to set out in the  course  of  this  decision  my
    observations in relation to each of the claims made  and  the  opinions
    set out.


Legal Framework


20. I have already set out the relevant legal framework at paragraphs  [15]
    to [24] of  my  error  of  law  decision.   Where  a  person  has  been
    recognised as a refugee as  set  out  in  Article  1A  of  the  Refugee
    Convention, that status can only be lost in accordance with Article  1C
    of the Convention.  For present purposes it is sufficient to note  that
    Article 1C provides that the 1951 Convention shall cease  to  apply  to
    any person falling under the terms of Article 1(A) if:


         (5)  He can no longer, because the circumstances in connexion  with
         which he has been recognized as a refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,
         continue to refuse to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the
         country of his nationality; Provided that this paragraph shall  not
         apply to a refugee falling under section A(1)of this Article who is
         able  to  invoke  compelling  reasons  arising  out   of   previous
         persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection of  the
         country of nationality;"


21. The Qualification Directive  establishes  a  common  framework  for  EU
    Member State in applying the Refugee Convention, and,  as  set  out  in
    paragraph [16] of my error of law decision,  Article  11(1)(e)  of  the
    Directive,  reflects  Article  1C(5).   Article  1(C)(5)  requires   an
    examination of  whether  there  has  been  a  relevant  change  in  the
    circumstances in connexion with which the person has been recognised as
    a refugee.


22. In EN (Serbia)  v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  630,  Stanley  Burnton  LJ,
    confirmed  that  a  durable  change  in  conditions  in  a  country  of
    nationality that results  in  a  refugee  having  no  genuine  fear  of
    persecution on  his  return  will  qualify  as  a  relevant  change  in
    circumstances for the purposes of Article  1C(5),  [95]  -  [96].   The
    requirement is  not  one  of  "fundamental  change",  although  Stanley
    Burnton LJ noted that what may fairly be considered  to  be  a  durable
    change in conditions in a country of  nationality  that  results  in  a
    refugee having no genuine fear of persecution on his return, may fairly
    be regarded as fundamental.


23. The onus is on the respondent to show that there has been a  change  in
    circumstances such that the refugee convention ceases to apply  to  the
    appellant.


Cessation of Refugee Status


24. As I have already set out, the respondent has throughout proceeded upon
    the basis, and appears to accept, that a grant of  refugee  status  was
    made to the appellant.  I accept the appellant has a subjective fear of
    return to  Zimbabwe.   I  must  consider  whether  the  respondent  has
    established that the appellant can no longer, because the circumstances
    in connection with which he has  been  recognised  as  a  refugee  have
    ceased to exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of the  protection
    of the country of his nationality.


25. The circumstances in connection  with  which  the  appellant  has  been
    recognised as a refugee  comprise  of  a  combination  of  the  general
    conditions in Zimbabwe and aspects  of  his  personal  characteristics.
    The appellant was born in Zimbabwe and he accepts  that  he  spent  his
    early childhood years there. He arrived in the  UK  in  February  2004,
    aged 14.  The appellant confirms that his mother left Zimbabwe when  he
    was only a very young child, and  she  claimed  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant  continued  to  reside  with  his  father.   The
    appellant states, and I accept, that after his mother was recognised as
    a refugee, she wished to make a better life for her  children  and  she
    therefore made applications for the appellant and his siblings to  join
    her in the United Kingdom under the family reunion provisions.


26. The appellant's mother arrived in the United Kingdom in March 2002 as a
    visitor and claimed asylum on being refused entry as  a  visitor.   The
    appellant's mother was granted refugee status and indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 13th September 2002, following a successful appeal. A copy of
    the determination of Adjudicator, Ms C Pugh promulgated on  7th  August
    2002 is in the respondent's bundle.  At paragraphs [17] to [24],  Ms  C
    Pugh  referred  to  the  background  to  the  claim  for  international
    protection made by the appellant's mother.  At paragraphs [26] to  [28]
    of her decision, she stated:


         "26. I will first address the question of  credibility.  I  believe
         that the appellant was credible when she recounted how she had been
         attacked by Zanu-PF youth.  However, Zanu-PF  youth  together  with
         the war veterans went  all  over  Zimbabwe  before  the  elections,
         terrorising neighbourhoods. They would pick on anyone who could not
         produce a Zanu-PF card.  The fact that they stopped  her  and  took
         her Mealie-meal does not seem to me to be a specific  targeting  of
         the appellant as chair lady for her district.  Nor  does  the  fact
         that they took exception to her throwing away  their  posters.  The
         ZANU-PF youth would attack and bully anyone. However, it does  show
         that she was targeted as an MDC supporter.


     27. The appellant was not credible as chair lady of her  area.  I  know
         that she claimed it was a small area, but she appeared to have very
         little political knowledge. The fact is that anyone  who  supported
         even in a small way  the  MDC  might  encounter  such  problems.  I
         believe that the appellant has tried to make her case  stronger  by
         claiming to be an officeholder.


     28. Nevertheless, this  is  not  relevant  at  the  present  date.  The
         respondent has said that he has ceased all removals to Zimbabwe for
         the time being. This is because the situation  after  the  election
         remained volatile. This is largely because President Mugabe, having
         won the election, showed  a  great  deal  of  annoyance  about  his
         treatment by the international community. In particular, the United
         Kingdom spoke out against the lack  of  fairness  involved  in  the
         election."


27. Ms Pugh noted the respondent had announced on 15th January 2002 that he
    has ceased all removals to Zimbabwe and that remained the  position  as
    at the date of the hearing before her in July 2002.  At paragraphs [31]
    and [32], she stated:


         "31.     This creates something of a problem.  It  appears  to  me
         from the background material that anybody returning from the United
         Kingdom as a failed asylum seeker is likely to be judged as an  MDC
         supporter. Even if they were very low level, they will still be  in
         danger on return. Since the danger comes  about  because  of  their
         imputed political opinion, or thier actual political opinion,  this
         brings them within the  Refugee  Convention.  After  the  elections
         things did not settle. Mr Mugabe was outraged by  the  attitude  of
         the international community, and in particular by Britain.


         32.  .... I must continue to look at the case as it would be if the
         appellant were now to be returned to  Zimbabwe.  If  the  appellant
         were now to be returned to Zimbabwe, she  has  produced  sufficient
         evidence on the lower standard of proof  to  show  that  there  are
         substantial grounds for thinking that she would be  persecuted  for
         her political opinion, or presumed political opinion."


28.  Adjudicator  Ms  Pugh,  therefore  rejected  the  claim  made  by  the
    appellant's mother that she was the chair lady for the local branch  of
    the MDC, but accepted that she was credible regarding her claim to have
    been attacked by Zanu-PF youth.  She found the appellant's  mother  had
    not been specifically targeted as chair lady for her district, but  had
    been targeted as an MDC supporter.


29. In support of his claim to be at risk upon return to  Zimbabwe  because
    of his imputed political opinion, the appellant refers to the claim for
    asylum that was made by his mother. In his witness statement he  claims
    his family history shows that he is at risk upon return  and  that  the
    situation in Zimbabwe has not changed.  The appellant's  mother  states
    she did not agree with the regime that was in power in Zimbabwe at  the
    time she left.  She claims she opposed the regime and as  a  result  of
    her activities, her life was at risk and she had to flee the country.


30. The appellant's mother was not called to give evidence before me and in
    her witness statements filed in support of the appeal  before  me,  she
    does not say anything that causes me to go behind the findings made  by
    Ms Pugh in 2002.  There is no evidence that the appellant  was  in  any
    way targeted when the family lived together in Zimbabwe, or during  the
    two-year period between March 2002 and  February  2004,  following  his
    mother's departure from Zimbabwe and the appellant's arrival in the UK.
     It is against  that  background  that  I  must  consider  whether  the
    appellant's subjective fear is objectively well-founded.


31. It is convenient to begin with the country guidance decision in CM  (EM
    country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC)  ("CM"),
    which establishes that there have been  some  changes  in  the  general
    political situation in Zimbabwe since the appellant left the country in
    February 2004. In CM, the Upper Tribunal concluded  there  had  been  a
    durable change since RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083.


32. The guidance is as follows:


         (2) The Country Guidance given by the Tribunal  in  EM  and  Others
         (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC)  on  the  position  in
         Zimbabwe as at the end of January 2011  was  not  vitiated  in  any
         respect by the use made of anonymous evidence from certain  sources
         in the Secretary of State's Fact Finding Mission  report  of  2010.
         The Tribunal was entitled to find that there  had  been  a  durable
         change since RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083....


         (3) The only change to the EM Country Guidance that it is necessary
         to make as regards the position as  at  the  end  of  January  2011
         arises from the judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.  The  EM
         Country Guidance is, accordingly, re-stated as  follows  (with  the
         change underlined in paragraph (5) below):


     (1)  As a general matter,  there  is  significantly  less  politically
            motivated violence in Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the  situation
            considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence  does
            not show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed
            asylum seeker from the United Kingdom,  having  no  significant
            MDC profile, would result in that person facing a real risk  of
            having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


            (2) The position is, however, likely to  be  otherwise  in  the
            case of a person without ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from
            the United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area
            of Zimbabwe, other  than  Matabeleland  North  or  Matabeleland
            South. Such a person  may  well  find  it  difficult  to  avoid
            adverse attention, amounting  to  serious  ill-treatment,  from
            ZANU-PF authority figures and those they control.  The  adverse
            attention may well involve a requirement to demonstrate loyalty
            to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm in the  event  of
            failure.   Persons  who  have  shown  themselves  not   to   be
            favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are  entitled  to  international
            protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do  whatever
            might be necessary to demonstrate such loyalty (RT (Zimbabwe)).

            (3) The situation is not  uniform  across  the  relevant  rural
            areas and there may be reasons  why  a  particular  individual,
            although at first sight appearing to fall within  the  category
            described in the preceding paragraph, in reality  does  not  do
            so. For example, the evidence might disclose that, in the  home
            village, ZANU-PF power structures or other  means  of  coercion
            are weak or absent.


            (4)  In general, a returnee from the United  Kingdom  to  rural
            Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely  to
            face significant difficulty from  ZANU-PF  elements,  including
            the security forces, even if the returnee is a  MDC  member  or
            supporter. A person may, however, be able to show that  his  or
            her village or area is one that, unusually, is under  the  sway
            of a ZANU-PF chief, or the like.


            (5) A returnee to Harare will in general  face  no  significant
            difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density area.
            Whilst the socio-economic situation in  high-density  areas  is
            more  challenging,  in  general  a   person   without   ZANU-PF
            connections will not face significant problems there (including
            a "loyalty test"), unless he  or  she  has  a  significant  MDC
            profile, which might cause him or her to feature on a  list  of
            those targeted for harassment, or  would  otherwise  engage  in
            political activities likely to attract the adverse attention of
            ZANU-PF, or would  be  reasonably  likely  to  engage  in  such
            activities, but for a fear of thereby  coming  to  the  adverse
            attention of ZANU-PF.


            (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will  in  general  not  suffer  the
            adverse attention of ZANU-PF, including  the  security  forces,
            even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.


            (7)  The issue of what is a person's home for the  purposes  of
            internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is
            not necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a
            person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland. As a
            general matter, it is unlikely  that  a  person  with  a  well-
            founded fear of persecution in a major  urban  centre  such  as
            Harare will have a viable internal relocation alternative to  a
            rural area in the Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland
            (including Bulawayo) may be negated  by  discrimination,  where
            the returnee is Shona.


            (8) Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or (subject
            to what we have  just  said)  Bulawayo  is,  in  general,  more
            realistic;  but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which
            persons are reasonably likely to find themselves will  need  to
            be considered, in  order  to  determine  whether  it  would  be
            unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate.


            (9) The economy of Zimbabwe has  markedly  improved  since  the
            period considered in RN.  The  replacement  of  the  Zimbabwean
            currency by the US dollar and the South African rand has  ended
            the recent hyperinflation. The availability of food  and  other
            goods in shops has likewise improved, as has  the  availability
            of utilities in Harare. Although  these  improvements  are  not
            being felt by  everyone,  with  15%  of  the  population  still
            requiring food aid, there has not been any deterioration in the
            humanitarian situation since late 2008.   Zimbabwe has a  large
            informal economy, ranging from  street  traders  to  home-based
            enterprises, which (depending on the  circumstances)  returnees
            may be expected to enter.


            (10) As was the position in RN, those  who  are  or  have  been
            teachers require to have their cases determined  on  the  basis
            that this fact places them in an enhanced  or  heightened  risk
            category, the significance of which will need to be assessed on
            an individual basis.


            (11)  In certain cases, persons found to be  seriously  lacking
            in credibility may properly be found as a result to have failed
            to show a reasonable likelihood (a) that  they  would  not,  in
            fact, be regarded, on return, as aligned  with  ZANU-PF  and/or
            (b) that they would be returning to a socio-economic milieu  in
            which problems with ZANU-PF will arise.  This  important  point
            was identified in RN ... and remains valid.


33. I may depart  from  existing  country  guidance  in  the  circumstances
    described in paragraphs 11 and 12 of the Upper Tribunal Immigration and
    Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011 No 2.  On behalf of the appellant, Mr
    Holt submits the very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence  for
    me to depart from the country guidance in CM are to  be  found  in  the
    background material relied upon by the appellant and in particular, the
    expert report of Dr Cameron.


34. Dr Cameron notes at paragraph [10] of her report that  the  appellant's
    mother was granted asylum on the basis that she was a supporter of  the
    MDC, and it was accepted that  at  the  time  of  her  application  for
    asylum, even low-level MDC supporters were likely to be  at  risk.  She
    confirms at paragraph [13], the  appellant  does  not  claim  to  be  a
    supporter of the MDC himself and he does not claim  that  he  has  been
    involved  in  any  political  activity  in  the  United  Kingdom.    At
    paragraphs [17] to  [57]  of  her  report,  she  refers  to  events  in
    Zimbabwe, particularly between 2017 and 2020.  At paragraph [58] of her
    report, Dr Cameron expresses the following opinion;


         "...current    Zimbabwean    state    perpetrated    violence    is
         indiscriminate, targeting all opposition supporters with both  low-
         and high  level  political  profiles,  as  well  as  those  without
         political profiles in both low- and high density neighbourhoods  of
         Harare, and indeed throughout the entire country.  MDC  supporters,
         and those perceived to be supporters of  the  political  opposition
         movement are at risk, reminiscent of country  conditions  in  2008.
         Persecution by state security forces (SFF) and supporters of  ZANU-
         PF is countrywide, and as demonstrated above, has targeted  members
         of the MDC and those with imputed political opinions in Bulawayo."


35. Dr Cameron refers  to  the  Country  Guidance  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in CM and at paragraph [60] of her report  she  expresses  the
    following opinion:


         "...contrary to country guidance, the risk to supporters of the MDC
         and those with an imputed political opinion is of no lesser  degree
         that (sic) conditions  when  the  appellant's  mother  was  granted
         refugee status and the appellant was granted  indefinite  leave  to
         enter the UK, at a  time,  as  is  the  case  now,  even  low-level
         supporters of MDC and those with imputed political opinions were at
         risk."


36. She noted that since the country guidance set out in CM, there has been
    regime change in Zimbabwe and at paragraphs [62] to [64] she states:


         "62. It is my opinion that regardless of the country conditions  in
         Zimbabwe when CM was promulgated, the current  political  situation
         within Zimbabwe, and the politically motivated violence in  current
         day Zimbabwe is comparable with the  situation  considered  by  the
         Asylum Immigration Tribunal in RN (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]
         UKAIT 00083, including paragraph 216:


             "those at risk are  not  simply  those  who  are  seen  to  be
             supporters of  the  MDC  but  anyone  who  cannot  demonstrate
             positive support for Zanu-PF or alignment with the regime."


         63.  To demonstrate loyalty to ZANU  PF,  one  must  have  a  party
         membership card, be willing and able to chant Zanu PF slogans, sing
         ZANU PF songs on demand, own ZANU PF regalia with the  portrait  of
         Mnangagwa, attend ZANU PF rallies and disrupt rallies organised  by
         the opposition or demonstrations against the poor  governance  that
         resulted in economic meltdown.


         64.  Contrary to paragraph 3(1) of CM, it is my  opinion  that  the
         current country conditions Zimbabwe leave human rights campaigners,
         government  critics,  members  and  supporters  of  the   political
         opposition, those perceived  to  be  supporters  of  the  political
         opposition, and those unable to demonstrate affiliation  with  ZANU
         PF, at high risk of state  violence  including  torture,  rape  and
         death.  The  existing  level  of  politically  motivated   violence
         throughout Zimbabwe, in both urban and rural settings  countrywide,
         and is of greater brutality than that experienced in 2008,  and  of
         2013, when CM was issued."


37. At section 4 of her  report  Dr  Cameron  addresses  the  position  the
    appellant would find himself in, upon return to Zimbabwe. At paragraphs
    [69] and [70], she states:


         "69. It is my opinion that those who are at  risk  in  contemporary
         Zimbabwe are  akin  to  those  categories  that  were  set  out  at
         paragraph 43  of  SM  &  Others  (MDC  -  internal  flight  -  risk
         categories) Zimbabwe CG [2005] UKIAT 00100, namely "those suspected
         or perceived of being associated with the opposition have  included
         activists, campaigners, officials and election polling agents,  MDC
         candidates for local and national government, MDC  members,  former
         MDC members, MDC supporters, those who voted or  believed  to  have
         voted for the MDC and those belonging to the MDC, families  of  the
         foregoing, employees of the foregoing,  those  whose  actions  have
         given rise to suspicion of  support  for  the  opposition  such  as
         attending  an  MDC  rally  or  wearing  a  T-shirt,   attending   a
         demonstration, teachers and other professionals, refusal to  attend
         a ZANU PF rally or chant a ZANU PF slogan or not having a  ZANU  PF
         membership card.


         70.  Irrespective of country conditions when  CM  was  issued,  the
         current country conditions are, as previously noted, more  akin  to
         country conditions when RN  (Returnees)  Zimabwe  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
         00083 was issued.  Paragraph 1 of RN states that "those at risk  on
         return to Zimbabwe on account of imputed political opinion  are  no
         longer restricted to those who  are  perceived  to  be  members  or
         supporters  of  the  MDC  but  include  anyone  who  is  unable  to
         demonstrate support for or loyalty to the regime or Zanu-PF."


38.  At paragraph [71] Dr Cameron  confirms  it  is  the  CIO  that  remain
    responsible for monitoring returns to  Harare  airport.   At  paragraph
    [72] she states:


         "As was the  case  when  paragraph  264  of  HS  (returning  asylum
         seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094 was issued, it is  the  COI
         who have responsibility for the operation of immigration control at
         Harare airport, and that the main focus of the operation  is  "  to
         identify those who may be of  adverse  interest...  those  who  are
         perceived to be politically active in support of  the  opposition."
         Those who the CIO have  an  interest  in  thereafter  subjected  to
         further interrogation."


39. She states that the authorities have acquired biometric  scanners  that
    use iris recognition and have introduced advanced passenger information
    systems to  help  increase  security.   The  Zimbabwean  Department  of
    Immigration has  developed  a  link  between  immigration  and  airline
    Departure Control Systems in order to  facilitate  data  transfer  that
    enables the CIO to receive data on all passengers several hours  before
    their arrival in Zimbabwe. She confirms the CIO monitors  every  flight
    from London to Harare and the CIO meet flights arriving in Harare  when
    British immigration officers or their representatives  handover  failed
    asylum seekers to their Zimbabwean counterparts.   At  paragraph  [74],
    she states:


         "... It is my opinion that the country situation has changed  since
         the reports dating back to 2002  and  the  CIO  have  continued  to
         detain asylum deportees at Harare airport and interrogate them."


40. At paragraph [75] she concludes:


         "With due consideration  to  the  profile  of  the  appellant,  the
         evidence available to me, and my own in-country knowledge, it is my
         opinion that it is plausible that the appellant will be  identified
         as a person of adverse interest to SSF and a person with an imputed
         political opinion. It is my opinion that those who  are  identified
         at the airport as being of sufficient  interest  to  merit  further
         interrogation are at real  risk  of  harm.  As  a  person  who  had
         benefited from refugee status in the UK and who is  the  son  of  a
         political refugee, it is plausible that the appellant is at risk of
         persecution by the CIO upon his  arrival  at  Harare  International
         Airport, including arbitrary arrest, detention,  torture  and  ill-
         treatment as result  of  his  imputed  political  opinion  and  his
         inability to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF."


41. In section 5 of her report, Dr  Cameron  addresses  the  socio-economic
    conditions in Zimbabwe as they now are, against the conclusions set out
    in headnote 3(9) of the country guidance decision of CM.


42. In her opinion, the current unemployment rate  of  95%  in  the  formal
    sector and the near collapse of the country's  economy  mean  that  the
    appellant will face insurmountable obstacles  in his effort  to  secure
    employment on return to Zimbabwe. In her  opinion  the  appellant  will
    become one of Zimbabwe's millions of urban or rural poor, and will find
    himself without employment and be destitute.  She states that  Zimbabwe
    is currently in the midst of a disaster in terms of food and  nutrition
    insecurity that is driven by climate  change  and  hyperinflation.  She
    refers to an announcement by the World Food Programme in December  2019
    that Zimbabwe is facing its worst hunger crisis in a decade  with  half
    of the population - 7.7 million people -  food  insecure.   She  states
    that the crisis continues to worsen in 2020 due  to  poverty  and  high
    unemployment, widespread corruption, several price instabilities,  lack
    of purchasing power, poor agricultural productivity, natural disasters,
    recurrent droughts and unilateral economic sanctions. She  also  refers
    to food aid being manipulated for political gain,  whereby  only  those
    who are able to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF and  membership  of  the
    party, have access to food aid.  At paragraph [93] of  her  report,  Dr
    Cameron concludes:


         "It is my opinion as substantiated by evidence provided, that as  a
         result of the ongoing disaster of food insecurity in Zimbabwe,  the
         appellant will be required to demonstrate loyalty  to  Zanu  PF  to
         benefit from the distribution of food aid if required on his return
         to Zimbabwe.  This  report  has  evidenced  that  those  unable  to
         demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF are at risk of harm. It is therefore
         my opinion that the appellant may be at risk  of  harm  if/when  he
         seeks food aid but is unable to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF when
         questioned by Zanu PF supporters or SSF."


43. Amongst the background material relied upon by the appellant is a House
    of Commons Library debate pack  titled  'Situation  in  Zimbabwe,  24th
    January 2019, that is intended to provide a summary of the situation in
    Zimbabwe. It is noted that elections in  Zimbabwe  in  July  2018  were
    widely  viewed  as  a  significant  moment  in  Zimbabwe's   democratic
    transition, being the first elections after Mugabe's forced resignation
    at the end of  2017.  The  report  notes  that  international  election
    observers welcomed the peaceful election and although the  EU  Election
    Observer Mission's final report (10 October) concluded many aspects  of
    the elections "failed to meet international standards", the author  was
    positive about the future saying " there is  a  thirst  for  democratic
    change in the country and the people want to see  democratic  dividends
    delivering a better life for all Zimbabweans".  The  report  refers  to
    the use of unjustifiable force against opposition protesters after  the
    election and notes that the economic crisis has deepened since  October
    and clashes in January 2019 were prompted in part by a  sharp  hike  in
    fuel prices.


44. I accept Dr Cameron has expertise in Zimbabwean  social  and  political
    matters and I give due weight to the opinions  expressed  by  her.  Her
    opinion is that the current  political  situation  within  Zimbabwe  is
    comparable  with  the  situation  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  RN
    (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083, that those at risk are  not
    simply those who are seen to be supporters of the MDC  but  anyone  who
    cannot demonstrate positive support for Zanu-PF or alignment  with  the
    regime.  I must consider whether there are strong grounds supported  by
    cogent evidence for me to depart from the country guidance set  out  in
    CM, a decision in which the Tribunal considered a wealth of  background
    material and evidence from a number of witnesses.


45. Having read the report of Dr Cameron, the background material cited  in
    her report, and the background material relied upon by the appellant  I
    accept that there is at least  some  evidence  of  spikes  in  violence
    around the elections and fuel protests in 2018 and 2019 and  of  random
    attacks on those without an MDC profile,  but  overall,  I  reject  the
    claim  that  the  current  political  situation  within   Zimbabwe   is
    comparable  with  the  situation  considered  by  the  Tribunal  in  RN
    (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083, and that anyone who  cannot
    demonstrate positive support for Zanu-PF or alignment with the  regime,
    is at risk upon return to Zimbabwe.


46. The country guidance case RN, was removed  from  the  list  of  country
    guidance cases on 14 March 2011, replaced initially by  EM  and  Others
    (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) (subsequently  quashed  by
    the Court of Appeal  and  referred  to  in  RT  (Zimbabwe)  and  others
    (Respondents) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Appellant)
    [2012] UKSC 38 and CM.


47. The Tribunal in CM  found  that  the  level  of  politically  motivated
    violence in Zimbabwe had fallen in comparison to the levels referred to
    in RN, albeit  MDC  supporters  remained  the  main  victims  of  those
    violations.  Since CM was reported, the MDC has broken  into  factions,
    and in November 2017 former President Mugabe left power being  replaced
    by President Mnangagwa.


48. I accept that there is evidence of a spike in violence around the  time
    of the 2018 elections and that this in turn resulted in a crackdown  on
    opposition leaders, but there  is  no  evidence  that  the  decline  in
    violence reported in CM has reversed in the  last  six  years.   In  my
    judgment, the spikes in violence around election times are nothing  new
    in Zimbabwe and do not necessarily affect the  overall  downward  trend
    identified  in  CM  nor  are  they   inconsistent  with  a  finding  of
    significant and durable change in Zimbabwe.


49. Dr Cameron states that state violence perpetrated against those who are
    perceived to be critics or opponents of the government of Zimbabwe  has
    prevailed between 2018 and 2020.  I am quite prepared  to  accept  that
    Zimbabwe remains a society where  brutality  and  human  rights  abuses
    continue to take place, but a common thread to many  of  the  incidents
    referred to by Dr Cameron is that the attacks were upon  supporters  of
    the political opposition, leaders, and those perceived  as  critics  of
    the government.


50. Dr Cameron states, at paragraph [22], that 2017 witnessed a  wealth  of
    reports of fear and intimidation from all levels of Zimbabwean society.
     She states regular political violence took place in both  high-density
    and low-density areas of Harare, and throughout the  country  including
    Bulawayo and Matebeleland.  She cites  an  article  by  Dewa  Mavhinga,
    Director of Southern Africa,  Human  Rights  Watch,  titled  'Political
    Violence on the rise in Zimbabwe' published on  20th  July  2017.   The
    article related to incidents in which  unidentified  assailants  burned
    down a bar in Harare owned by the deputy president of  Zimbabwe's  main
    opposition party, MDC-T, and the destruction of the house of  an  MDC-T
    local councillor believed to have been carried out by supporters of the
    ruling ZANU-PF party, an allegation rejected by Zanu-PF.   The  article
    states that Human Rights Watch research has  shown  that  the  police's
    failure to make arrests in these cases and the resulting  impunity  has
    helped fuel cycles of political violence in the country.  The  evidence
    is not necessarily indicative of ZANU-PF  politically  motivated  human
    rights violations against simple supporters of the opposition or MDC.


51. As to the position in relation to the risk at the airport, in  CM,  the
    Tribunal considered what happens upon return at Harare airport, and  in
    particular, the screening procedures.  At  paragraph  [205]  the  Upper
    Tribunal said:


         "205. To return to the position at  the  point  of  return  of  the
         airport, we are fully satisfied that the fresh evidence  completely
         fails to disclose any change in the position as described in HS, as
         tending to suggest any heightened scrutiny  of  returnees.  On  the
         contrary, the evidence of Ms Scruton, together with that of  the  7
         returnees who featured in the 2010 FFM  Report,  clearly  shows  no
         justification for regarding low level MDC supporters as the sort of
         activists, who the HS Tribunal thought likely to fall foul  of  the
         CIO. We will address this issue later, when considering  the  facts
         of the appellant's case. But it would be wrong not to observe  here
         that there is no evidence to show the CIO are, for example,  likely
         to detain at the airport and torture a person for having attended a
         MDC branch meeting in the United Kingdom."


52. Dr Cameron cites an article written by Paul Harris  and  Martin  Bright
    published in The Guardian on Sunday 13th January 2002 titled "They flee
    here for safety but are sent back to face death",  and  an  article  by
    Severin Carrell and Sophie Goodchild published in  the  Independent  on
    Sunday 3rd July 2005 titled "Tortured and dumped:  the  fate  of  those
    sent home to Mugabe by UK", to support her claim, at paragraph [74]  of
    her report, that over the past 15 years there  are  reports  of  failed
    asylum seekers being victimised,  including  being  beaten  upon  their
    arrival at Harare  airport.   The  articles  concern  the  danger  that
    deportees are said to face when refused asylum and forcibly returned to
    Zimbabwe with little regard for their safety.   The  articles  pre-date
    the country guidance now in force and Dr Cameron does not  identify  in
    her report the evidence that she relies upon to support her  conclusion
    that over the past 15 years (i.e. 2005 to 2020), failed asylum  seekers
    have been victimised, including being  beaten  upon  their  arrival  at
    Harare airport.


53. I do not accept the conclusion reached by Dr Cameron that those who are
    at risk in contemporary Zimbabwe are akin to those categories that were
    set out at paragraph 43 of SM & Others (MDC - internal  flight  -  risk
    categories) Zimbabwe CG [2005]  UKIAT  00100.   In  SM  &  Others,  the
    Tribunal found that those deported from the United Kingdom to  Zimbabwe
    are subject to interrogation on return and those who are  suspected  of
    being politically active with the MDC would be at real risk;  [41]  and
    [42].  The Tribunal went on to reject the submission that every  former
    member of the MDC faces a real risk  of  ill-treatment  on  return  and
    concluded that each case must depend  upon  its  own  circumstances  in
    order to see whether the background and profile  of  an  individual  is
    such as to make  it  likely  that  he  would  be  of  interest  to  the
    authorities.


54. In support of her opinion that the appellant may be  at  risk  of  harm
    if/when he seeks food aid, but is unable to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu
    PF, Dr Cameron refers, at paragraph [90] of her  report,  to  food  aid
    being manipulated for political gain throughout  the  post-independence
    history of Zimbabwe, whereby only those who  are  able  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to Zanu PF and membership of the party have access to food aid.
      She refers, at paragraph [91], to an incident in July 2019 in which a
    Zanu PF activist summoned villagers for  a  community  distribution  of
    maize, and when villagers assembled, they were told that  only  devoted
    ruling party supporters will receive the food aid and  to  return  home
    and get ruling party regalia as evidence of their support for Zanu  PF.
    That in itself is not evidence of a general and widespread  requirement
    to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF.


55. I accept that there is evidence that the economic situation in Zimbabwe
    has worsened as set out in the report of  Dr  Cameron,  but  I  am  not
    satisfied that this represents a  deterioration  in  the  circumstances
    examined and found in CM.   I note that there are several references in
    CM to the challenging economic circumstances in Zimbabwe in 2012 and  I
    am satisfied that Zimbabwe was also suffering poor economic  conditions
    then.  It is not a new development.


56. I note the distinction in  CM  between  those  with  and  without,  for
    example, a significant MDC profile and having considered the report  of
    Dr Cameron and the background material relied upon by the appellant,  I
    am not satisfied that the situation  has  changed  materially  for  the
    worse since CM.


57. In reaching my decision, I have also had regard to the  representations
    made by the UNHCR in the letter dated 3rd July 2015.  The  UNHCR  draws
    attention to reports of politically motivated violence long  after  the
    2013 elections and urged the respondent  to  carefully  assess  whether
    fundamental and durable  changes  have  indeed  occurred  in  Zimbabwe.
    Based upon the background material  cited  in  its  report,  the  UNHCR
    claimed that protection concerns persist  in  Zimbabwe  and  should  be
    taken into consideration before any  decision  is  made  to  cease  the
    appellant's refugee status. I agree respectfully with  the  UNHCR  that
    the situation in Zimbabwe remains  difficult  and  I  agree  that  some
    people who have been recognised as refugees might still be in  need  of
    international protection. That is something to decide on a case-by-case
    basis when the need arises.


58. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in  February  2004,  aged  14,
    with indefinite leave to enter for family reunion to join  his  mother.
    At the hearing of her appeal, Ms Pugh found the appellant's mother  had
    been  targeted  as  an  MDC  supporter.  The  appellant  has  not  been
    politically active himself, either in Zimbabwe or in the United Kingdom
    and has never indicated any  intention  to  be  politically  active  on
    return to  Zimbabwe  in  the  future.   The  appellant's  inability  to
    demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF cannot  be  implied  from  the  evidence
    before me.


59. I am not satisfied that 16 years after  the  appellant  left  Zimbabwe,
    anyone would  have  any  particular  memory  of,  or  interest  in  the
    appellant  by  reason  of  his  relationship  with  his  mother.    The
    appellant, even on his own account was able to return  to  Zimbabwe  in
    2012, albeit for a few days.  In  his  second  witness  statement,  the
    appellant states that when  he  last  visited  Zimbabwe  in  2012,  the
    airport staff were very aggressive with him and spoke in Shona.  He was
    searched and they told him that he looked different and he spoke with a
    different accent. He describes there being regular  roadblocks  in  the
    street that he had to pay money to go through.   The  evidence  of  the
    appellant's siblings regarding their experience when they  returned  to
    Zimbabwe for a short period in 2015 is to the effect that they  had  to
    pay bribes at the airport to get into the country. There is no evidence
    that the appellant or indeed his siblings, were  in  any  way  targeted
    because  of  an  imputed  political  reason  or  by  reason  of   their
    relationship with their mother, or her previous support for the MDC.


60. Having considered the evidence before me, I find  that  the  respondent
    has discharged the burden of establishing that there has been a  change
    in circumstances such that the refugee convention ceases  to  apply  to
    the appellant.  I find that even on the lower standard,  the  appellant
    can no longer, because the circumstances in connection  with  which  he
    has been recognized as a refugee have  ceased  to  exist,  continue  to
    refuse to avail himself  of  the  protection  of  the  country  of  his
    nationality.


61. I do not consider that the appellant is at risk of a threat to his life
    or serious harm in the event of being returned to Zimbabwe. I am  quite
    satisfied that there would be no breach of his rights under Articles  2
    and  3  ECHR  and  the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to   humanitarian
    protection.


Article 8


62. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 defines  a  foreign  criminal,  a
    person not a British citizen who is convicted in the UK of  an  offence
    and, inter alia, sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12
    months. Section  32(4)  of  the  2007  Act  sets  outs  out  the  clear
    proposition that deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to  the
    public good. That is a  statement  of  public  policy  enacted  by  the
    legislature, which the courts and tribunals  are  obliged  to  respect.
    Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act requires the Secretary of State to make a
    deportation order in respect of every foreign criminal, subject to  the
    exceptions set out in  section 33.  Insofar as is relevant that is:


         "(2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

             (a)  a person's Convention rights, or

             (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
         Convention.

         ...

         (7) The application of an exception-

             (a) does not prevent the making of a deportation order;

             (b) results in it being assumed neither that deportation of
             the person concerned is conducive to the public good nor that
             it is not conducive to the public good;

         but section 32(4) applies despite the application of Exception 1 or
    4.".



63. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002
    Act") informs the decision making in relation to the application of the
    section 33 exceptions. Section 117A in Part 5A provides  that,  when  a
    court or tribunal is required to  determine  whether  a  decision  made
    under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life under Article 8, and, as  a  result,  would  be
    unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998, the court, in considering the
    public interest question, must  (in  particular)  have  regard  to  the
    considerations listed in  section  117B  and,  additionally,  in  cases
    concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the  considerations
    listed in section 117C.


64. The issue before me is whether the decision to refuse the human  rights
    claim made by the appellant is a justified interference with the  right
    to  respect  for  family  life,  in  the  context  of  the  appellant's
    conviction and the fact that he is a 'foreign criminal' as  defined  in
    s117D(2) of the 2002 Act.  The Immigration Rules set out  the  approach
    to be followed by the Secretary  of  State  where  a  foreign  criminal
    liable to deportation claims that the deportation would be contrary  to
    the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 ECHR.  Insofar  as  is
    relevant here, paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules state:


         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and


             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


             ...


             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A


65. Applying paragraph 398 of the immigration rules  and  s117C(6)  of  the
    2002 Act, the public  interest  requires  the  appellant's  deportation
    unless there are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2 of the 2002 Act.


66. In NA (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  662,  Lord  Justice  Jackson
    said:


          "28.    ... The new para. 398 uses the same language as section
          117C(6). It refers to "very compelling circumstances, over and
          above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399
          and 399A of the 2014 rules refer to the same subject matter as
          Exceptions 1 and 2 in section 117C , but they do so in greater
          detail.

          29. In our view, the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in JZ
          (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase used in section
          117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have held is
          to be read into section 117C(3) does not mean that a foreign
          criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from seeking
          to rely on matters falling within the scope of the circumstances
          described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend that
          "there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
          described in Exceptions 1 and 2". As we have indicated above, a
          foreign criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he
          would need to be able to point to features of his case of a kind
          mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A of the
          2014 rules), or features falling outside the circumstances
          described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made his
          claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

67. The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest  as  set
    out in s117C(1) of the 2002 Act.  Furthermore, as set out in  s117C(2),
    the more serious the offence  committed  by  a  foreign  criminal,  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.  I  have
    already set out the appellant's criminal  history  and  the  sentencing
    remarks  of  His  Honour  Judge  Pert  QC  following  the   appellant's
    conviction  for  Robbery,  and  which  lead  to  an  8-year   term   of
    imprisonment at paragraph [9] of this decision.  As  His  Honour  Judge
    Pert QC noted, the appellant and  an  accomplice  went  into  someone's
    home, armed, at night, where  the  occupant  was  present,  taking  the
    contents of the safe and preventing the occupant leaving the apartment,
    at  knifepoint.   The  appellant  has  been  convicted  of  an  offence
    involving the use of  violence  in  a  place  where  an  individual  is
    entitled to feel safe and secure. The  sentence  imposed  reflects  the
    severity of the offence.


68.  I have again considered the evidence set out in the witness statements
    of the appellant, his mother and  his  siblings.    He  claims,  and  I
    accept, that he is very close to his mother and siblings. The appellant
    attended  Babington  Community  College  and  studied  engineering  and
    electronics.   After  completing  college,  he  has  gained  some  work
    experience including, as a packer, for Walkers  crisps.  The  appellant
    moved out of the family home in  Leicester  because  he  felt  that  he
    needed his own space.  It was during this period that the appellant was
    convicted of robbery. At the time, the appellant was in a relationship.
     The appellant and his then partner were planning  a  future  together.
    That relationship broke down following the appellant's  conviction  and
    whilst he was serving his sentence of  imprisonment.   In  prison,  the
    appellant completed a number of courses including courses around victim
    awareness, interview skills, and  drug  and  alcohol  misuse.  He  also
    completed vocational courses such as plumbing, painting and decorating,
    and an electricians course and an engineering course. He also completed
    an NVQ Level 1 in cooking.  He describes his  behaviour  in  prison  as
    being  'impeccable'  and  he  claims  that  was  acknowledged  by   his
    classification as an enhanced prisoner  with  the  benefits  associated
    with that status. The appellant claims in his first  witness  statement
    that he is scared of the thought of having to return  to  Zimbabwe.  He
    states he has no money or savings and would be unable to manage because
    there is nothing in Zimbabwe for him. There is no family home to return
    to, and he claims he would find it difficult to find work.   He  claims
    all of his qualifications and skills have been  gained  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and, are relevant to  the  United  Kingdom  job  market.   The
    appellant made his second witness statement following his release  into
    the community and a successful application for bail. He states that  he
    is now taking control of his own life and helps his mother with day-to-
    day tasks, together with assistance looking after his  younger  brother
    and  providing  guidance  to  him.  The  appellant  is  now  in  a  new
    relationship. He claims he does  not  remember  a  lot  about  Zimbabwe
    because he was quite young when he came to the UK. He  does  not  speak
    any Shona and although he speaks a little Ndebele, that is spoken  with
    a British accent which would draw attention to him. He claims he has no
    communication with anyone in Zimbabwe and the family has no heritage or
    land in Zimbabwe, so he would be returning to  destitution.  He  claims
    that his family in the UK would be  unable  to  provide  any  financial
    support to him. He is concerned that he would be unable to maintain his
    relationship with his family because he would have to find somewhere to
    hide and the internet is not readily available.  The cost of air travel
    is prohibitive.  In his most recent statement, the  appellant  confirms
    that he remains heavily involved with his family and that he remains in
    a relationship with a British citizen.


69. In her statement, the appellant's mother states  that  the  family  are
    originally from Bulawayo, and although the MDC has  a  presence  there,
    Zanu PF will suspect the appellant  because  of  his  accent  and  also
    because he has not lived in Zimbabwe for a long period.  She claims the
    appellant does not speak Ndebele and has spent too much time away  from
    Zimbabwe to be able to pick it up properly.  The  appellant's  siblings
    confirm the strong relationship they have with the appellant.


70. I have in the papers before the OASys assessment  which  confirms  that
    the appellant has gained skills during his period in custody  and  that
    he displayed a good attitude during his imprisonment. I have  a  letter
    from his Offender Manager, Rod  Mitchell  dated  22nd  May  2017,  that
    confirms the appellant was released on licence on 25th October 2016 and
    his licence and sentence  expiry  date  is  27th  September  2020.   Mr
    Mitchell  confirms  the  appellant's  compliance   with   his   licence
    conditions has been faultless and he has engaged well with supervision.
    He confirms the appellant presents a low risk of  reoffending  overall,
    but is deemed to present a medium risk of serious harm to  the  public,
    having regard to the nature of the index offence.   There  is  evidence
    from the Probation Support Officer, J Green  confirming  the  appellant
    has fully engaged with  probation  staff  and  has  been  motivated  to
    address his offending behaviour. He has been subject  to  random  drugs
    testing and these have all come back with a negative result,  including
    his most recent appointment on 14th August 2018.


71. I have also considered the letter from Arvin Chilupula, of  Mail  Boxes
    Etc dated 20th February 2019 confirming  the  appellant  has  completed
    voluntary work at the store on a part-time basis. The appellant is said
    to be very hard-working, good with timekeeping and getting  along  with
    others.  There is also before me an email from Ben Tebbutt  dated  20th
    February 2019, attesting to the character  of  the  appellant  and  the
    assistance provided by him.


72. As to Exception 1 set out in s117C(4) of  the  2002  Act,  I  find  the
    appellant has been lawfully resident in the UK for most  of  his  life.
    The appellant was born on 24th April 1989 and  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom lawfully in February 2004, aged 14.  He is now 31 years old.


73. I am also prepared  to  accept  that  the  appellant  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.  The question  is  whether
    having regard to his upbringing, education, employment history, history
    of criminal offending and imprisonment, relationships with  family  and
    friends, lifestyle and any other relevant factors, the appellant was at
    the time of the hearing before me socially and culturally integrated in
    the UK.  I have borne in mind the offending history and the  fact  that
    the appellant received a lengthy  term  of  imprisonment.  However,  he
    arrived in the UK as a child, has received education here, and has been
    employed. He has undoubtedly established a good relationship  with  his
    family and friends.  He has extensive family ties to the United Kingdom
    including the ties that he has with his mother and siblings.  There  is
    evidence before me of the activities the appellant  has  undertaken  in
    the community and the commission of the offences cannot  by  themselves
    extinguish the fact that the appellant has been involved in society and
    thereby integrated into society in the UK during the time that  he  has
    been here.


74. I turned to consider whether there would be very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration into Zimbabwe. In  doing  so,  I  remind
    myself  that  the  assessment  of  'integration'  calls  for  a   broad
    evaluative judgement.  In SSHD -v- Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, Sales LJ
    said, at [14]


         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one. It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not  appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life."


75. The appellant was born in Zimbabwe and lived there until February 2004.
    He received some education in Zimbabwe, and lived in Zimbabwe with  his
    father following his  mother's  departure  in  2002.   The  appellant's
    immediate family are now all in the UK. I find that  it  is  reasonably
    likely that the appellant will be familiar with Zimbabwean culture  and
    traditions. He confirms in his  witness  statement  that  he  speaks  a
    little Ndebele. I find he would undoubtedly acquire greater fluency  in
    Zimbabwe. I accept his claim that all  his  qualifications  and  skills
    have been gained in the United Kingdom, but they are  in  my  judgement
    qualifications and skills that will assist the appellant to secure work
    and employment in Zimbabwe.


76. I have carefully considered the matters set out in the expert report of
    Dr  Cameron  regarding  the  economic  circumstances  in  Zimbabwe  and
    although there will inevitably be a good degree of disruption  for  the
    appellant to begin with, I find the appellant would be able,  within  a
    reasonable period, to find his feet and exist  and  have  a  meaningful
    life within Zimbabwe.   The  appellant  is  young  and  has  no  health
    conditions that will  prevent  him  from  engaging  fully  in  life  in
    Zimbabwe. Even though he does not have friends or immediate  family  in
    Zimbabwe, that does not mean that he would encounter  very  significant
    obstacles. There will inevitably be a period of adjustment, but  in  my
    judgement he could adjust to life there within a reasonable  timescale.
    The appellant is of working age and he is in good  health.  I  find  he
    would be able to secure employment using the skills and  qualifications
    he has now attained, within a reasonable timeframe.  He has  experience
    of working in the UK and has acquired transferable skills. He  has  the
    support of his mother and siblings who are clearly very  fond  of  him,
    and I find, would provide some short-term  support  to  the  appellant.
    The appellant's education and knowledge of English will also  help  him
    get work although I do not for a moment suggest that it will be an easy
    task. Zimbabwe remains a difficult country emerging from the  financial
    disaster associated with the Mugabe years. Life there will not be  easy
    but I do not accept he could not cope.  Having considered the  evidence
    as a whole, I find there are  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration in Zimbabwe.


77. As to Exception 2 set out in s117C(5) of the 2002  Act,  the  appellant
    does not have a subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a  qualifying
    child and there is very little  information  before  me  regarding  his
    current relationship. In his statement signed on 18th February 2019 the
    appellant states that he has been in  a  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen, whose parents are not from Zimbabwe and who does not have  any
    ties to to Zimbabwe.  Whilst I accept the appellants girlfriend will be
    upset if the appellant has to leave the United Kingdom, I do not accept
    on the limited evidence before me that the effect  of  the  appellant's
    deportation on his partner, even if  she  is  a  "qualifying  partner",
    would be unduly harsh.


78. I have  carefully  considered  all  the  matters  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant  collectively  in  order  to  determine  whether   they   are
    sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high  public  interest  in
    deportation. For the avoidance of doubt, although not repeated here,  I
    have taken into account the evidence before me and the findings that  I
    have made and set out in this  decision.  I  have  borne  in  mind  the
    immediate difficulties that would be experienced by the  appellant  who
    left Zimbabwe as  a  child  and  the  short-term  difficulties  he  may
    experience in terms of finding work and reintegrating  in  Zimbabwe.  I
    also bear in mind that the appellant would be leaving his wider  family
    behind.


79. I accept the appellant has a private life in the UK given the length of
    time that he spent here. I also bear  in  mind  that  he  has  a  close
    relationship with his family.


80. Following the decision of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016]
    UKSC 60 I also adopt  a  "balance  sheet"  approach  and  consider  the
    various factors that weigh both for and against deportation. As I  have
    already set out, the starting point  must  be  the  very  great  public
    weight which must be given to Parliament's intention that absent  "very
    compelling circumstances" it is very much in  the  public  interest  to
    deport foreign criminals.  The following factors weigh in favour of the
    appellant:


          a. The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  lawfully,  as  a
             child and he has lived in the United Kingdom since the  age  of
             14.  He has not returned to Zimbabwe save for a short visit  in
             2012 following the death of his father,  which  only  lasted  a
             number of days.


          b. The appellant's mother and siblings live in the United Kingdom.
             There will inevitably be disruption to those relationships  and
             it will be  difficult  for  the  appellant  to  maintain  those
             relationships in the  way  currently  enjoyed  because  of  the
             distances involved.


          c. The appellant  is  remorseful,  and  engaged  well  during  his
             sentence of imprisonment.  There is extensive evidence  in  the
             appeal bundle before me regarding  courses  and  rehabilitation
             work that the  appellant  has  undertaken.  The  appellant  has
             complied with his licence conditions and he  has  engaged  well
             with supervision.


          d. The appellant presents a low risk of reoffending  overall,  but
             is deemed to present a medium  risk  of  serious  harm  to  the
             public, having regard to the nature of the index offence.


          e. The appellant speaks  English,  is  fit  and  healthy  and  has
             achieved qualifications and work experience in the UK.


81.  The following factors weigh against the appellant  and  in  favour  of
    deportation:


          a. The appellant has been convicted of a serious offence involving
             violence and received a sentence of imprisonment of four  years
             or more.


          b. The more serious the offence  committed,  the  greater  is  the
             public interest in deportation.


          c. Although the appellant is socially  and  culturally  integrated
             into the UK, the strength of this integration must be viewed in
             the context of his serious offending.


82. My analysis of whether the deportation of the  appellant  breaches  his
    right to respect for private and family life under  Article  8,  taking
    into account the public interest question as expressed in section  117C
    of the 2002 Act, lead me to the  conclusion  that  there  are  no  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    and 2.


83. Having carefully considered the  evidence  before  me  I  conclude  the
    decision to deport the appellant strikes a  fair  balance  between  the
    appellant's rights and interests, and those of his family, when weighed
    against the  wider  interests  of  society.   In  my  judgement  it  is
    proportionate to the legitimate end sought to be achieved  and  I  find
    the appellant's removal in pursuance of the deportation order would not
    be a disproportionate interference with his right to  respect  for  his
    family and private life.


84. It follows that the appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


NOTICE OF DECISION


85. The appeal is dismissed.

    V. Mandalia
Date 26th September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia












