
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00028/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2018                           |On 7 March 2018               |
|Ex tempore judgment                           |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HON MR JUSTICE MARTIN SPENCER
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ARB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw, Counsel instructed by London Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By permission to appeal granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  on  4
    January 2018, the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach who allowed the
    appeal of the respondent, to whom we shall refer as  ARB,  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 9 February 2017 to deport  him
    to Turkey which is the country of  his  citizenship.   The  grounds  of
    appeal are set out in the  permission  application  for  permission  to
    appeal dated 13 November 2017 and we will consider those in more detail
    later.

The Background to this Decision

 2. ARB was born in Turkey on [ ] 1966 and he entered the UK on  8  January
    1989 at the age of 22 as an asylum seeker.  On 2 October 1989 the  Home
    Office wrote to ARB to inform him that he  had  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee in the United  Kingdom  under  the  United  Nations  Convention
    relating to the Status of Refugees of 28 July 1951 and its protocol  of
    1967.  He was granted leave to remain in the UK until 2  October  1993.
    On 11 January 1995 ARB was granted indefinite leave to remain.   On  21
    February 1999 ARB married 'G' in Istanbul and they have lived in London
    throughout their married lives.  They have two children, both  born  in
    London, 'H' born on [ ] 2001 and 'B' born on [  ]  2002  who  are  both
    British citizens.  In the course of his residence in  the  UK  ARB  has
    made three applications for naturalisation  but  these  have  all  been
    unsuccessful.

 3. On 29 August 2014 ARB was convicted at Snaresbrook Crown Court of  four
    counts of controlling or possessing fake goods for the purposes of sale
    or hire for which he  was  sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  of
    seventeen months.  It is that conviction which has led the Secretary of
    State to notify ARB of the decision to deport him.   The  circumstances
    of the conviction and sentence arise from the sentencing remarks of the
    judge.  ARB owned or rented various units on an industrial  estate  and
    from those units he ran a company called Read and Blue  London  Trading
    Limited.  This company was a wholesaler, buying  lorry-loads  of  goods
    and selling them on to  other  people.   In  July  2013  Her  Majesty's
    Customs and Excise detected a lorry load of goods which appeared to  be
    8 kilo boxes of Ariel washing powder but which in fact were counterfeit
    and had originated from somewhere in eastern Europe.  This followed  on
    from a previous detection of a lorry load of fake Persil washing powder
    in April 2013.  The amount realised from this fraudulent  activity  was
    impossible to ascertain because of the lack of documentation but a  sum
    of about �40,000 in cash was found at ARB's  premises.   In  sentencing
    ARB the judge said, "This was a piece of thorough  dishonesty  on  your
    part made worse by the fact that you continued  with  your  contentions
    about the honesty of this operation before  the  jury",  this  being  a
    reference to the fact that ARB had pleaded not guilty  to  two  of  the
    counts on the indictment but had been convicted by a jury.  Even before
    the First-tier Tribunal, ARB continued to minimise  his  role,  stating
    that he did not know that the goods were fake, an assertion  which  was
    inconsistent with the verdicts of the jury.

 4. On 16  December  2014  ARB  was  served  with  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order against him in accordance with Section 32(5)  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007 subject to consideration of Section 33 of the  same
    Act.  On 9 February 2017 it was decided to refuse ARB's protection  and
    human rights claims made on 16  December  2014  and  29  May  2015  and
    maintain the decision to deport him as it was not accepted that he fell
    within any of the exceptions set out in Section 33 of the 2007 Act.

 5. Representations made by London Solicitors in their  letter  of  29  May
    2015 on ARB's behalf refer to both children being British nationals and
    students at grades 8 and 9 respectively at that time.  The letter said:

         "They are well-settled in the United Kingdom and their main  tongue
         is English as they hardly speak any Turkish.  They have spent their
         entire lives in the United Kingdom and they cannot be  expected  to
         relocate in Turkey or elsewhere  apart  from  the  United  Kingdom.
         Their schools and friends are all in  the  United  Kingdom.   Their
         children have been in Turkey only for  holiday  purposes  and  when
         they were there they always stayed in a hotel.   His  daughter  [H]
         has been taking gym courses and she came  first  at  a  competition
         whereas his son has been attending drama courses...His wife [G] has
         been currently working as a taxi driver for about ten months.   She
         is also well-settled together with the children.  At the moment  he
         [ARB]  looks  after  their  children  while   his   wife   is   the
         breadwinner."

 6. In addition to the representations of 29  May  2015  the  Secretary  of
    State also received a letter from the United Nations High  Commissioner
    for Refugees which drew attention to the difficulties which  ARB  might
    face if he returned to Turkey by virtue of his Kurdish ethnicity.   The
    UNHCR also made  representations  in  relation  to  the  provisions  of
    Article 33(2) of the 1951 Convention.

 7. By her decision of 9 February 2017 the Secretary of  State  decided  as
    follows:

      i) Subsequent to  obtaining  refugee  status,  ARB  could  no  longer,
         because of the circumstances in connection with which he  had  been
         recognised as a refugee had ceased to exist, continue to refuse  to
         avail himself of the protection of the country of  his  nationality
         leading to revocation of the grant of refugee status;

     ii) ARB did not qualify for humanitarian protection but because of  his
         conviction, sentence had been excluded from a grant of humanitarian
         protection pursuant  to  paragraph  339D(iii)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.

    iii) ARB was not entitled to discretionary leave to  remain  because  on
         the information available it was not considered that to deport  him
         would breach the UK's obligations under any of the Articles of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights.

     iv) ARB's circumstances including the best interests  of  his  children
         did not lead to a decision that deportation would breach  the  UK's
         obligations under Article 8 ECHR because "the  public  interest  in
         deporting you outweighs your right to private and family life".

 8. Of particular relevance for present purposes is  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State in relation to the children.  The decision stated:

         "Consideration has been given below to  the  effect  deporting  you
         will have on your children and whether the best interests  of  your
         children outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deporting  you.   The
         requirements of the exception to deportation on the basis of family
         life  with  a  child  are  set  out  at  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  This exception applies where:

         (a)  the foreign criminal has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported.

    The decision continues:

         "On the basis of the submitted evidence it  is  accepted  that  you
         have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with H  and  B.
         It is not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for  H  and  B  to
         live in Turkey.  Although your children are British citizens,  they
         are also of Turkish descent by virtue of the fact that both you and
         their mother are of Turkish origin.  They would  have  been  raised
         within an environment where they  would  have  been  aware  of  the
         language and the customs of Turkey.  They are young  enough  at  16
         and 14 years of age, to adapt to living in Turkey with the  support
         of their parents if that is what you and their mother  decide.   It
         is accepted that any move to another country will cause a degree of
         disruption to a child's life but it is considered that many  people
         around the world reasonably and legitimately take their children to
         live in another country  either  temporarily  or  permanently  even
         though this may cause a certain amount of disruption.

         It is not accepted it will be unduly harsh for H and B to remain in
         the UK even though you are to be deported.   This  is  because  you
         have failed to provide any evidence to show that there would  be  a
         significant detrimental effect upon  them  if  you  were  deported.
         Furthermore, you have not provided any evidence to show  that  your
         presence in the UK is essential to prevent  them  from  being  ill-
         treated,  their  health  or  development  being  impaired.   It  is
         acknowledged that your absence will likely result in some  negative
         emotional impact on your children but they will  continue  to  live
         with their mother who will care for them  as  they  adapt  to  life
         without face-to-face contact with you and will continue  to  attend
         school where they will have the  stability  and  support  which  is
         necessary to complete their education.  There is no  evidence  that
         their welfare has been compromised whilst  in  the  care  of  their
         mother.  Besides, your children will not lose all contact with  you
         as  this  can  be  maintained  by  visits  and  modern   forms   of
         communication.

         Therefore, having considered all available information, it  is  not
         accepted that  you  meet  the  requirements  of  the  exception  to
         deportation on the basis of family life with a child."

 9. ARB appealed against this decision and the appeal was heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Beach on 26 September 2017.   Having  set  out  the
    background, the evidence which she had heard and the  submissions  from
    Counsel from both sides, Judge Beach at paragraphs 51 and following set
    out the relevant law.  Having cited  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules,
    parts of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 she  referred
    to the relevant authorities.  She reminded herself of the  decision  in
    McLarty [2014] UKUT 00315 where it was stated that in enacting  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007:

         "Parliament views the object of deporting  those  with  a  criminal
         record  as  a  very  strong  policy,  which  is  constant  in   all
         cases...Parliament has tilted the  scales  strongly  in  favour  of
         deportation and for them to return to the level and then  swing  in
         favour of a criminal opposing deportation there must be  compelling
         reasons, which must be exceptional."

10. Furthermore, she reminded herself that in MM (Uganda) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    617 the Court of Appeal stated, "The context  in  these  cases  invites
    emphasis on two factors, (1) the public  interest  in  the  removal  of
    foreign criminals and (2) the need for a  proportionate  assessment  of
    any interference with Article 8 rights".  The Court referred to Section
    117C(2) of the 2002 Act which states, "The  more  serious  the  offence
    committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is the public interest  in
    deportation of the criminal".

11. Finally, Judge Beach reminded herself of the principles  of  law  which
    were restated in the Court of Appeal in AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    1012.  At paragraph  60  of  her  judgment  Judge  Beach  set  out  the
    principles of law which are well-established  and  not  in  dispute  in
    these appeals as follows:

         "(1) The Rules establish a set of  criteria  which  tribunals  must
             apply when assessing the  impact  of  Article  8  in  criminal
             deportation cases.

         (2)  The rules are a complete code.  Accordingly, when applying the
             'exceptional circumstances criteria' the  court  should  apply
             the article 8 proportionality test, referring to MF (Nigeria).

         (3)  Unless the specific exceptions  apply,  the  scales  are  very
             heavily weighted in favour of deportation.   In  MF  (Nigeria)
             Lord Dyson said that there must be 'very  compelling  reasons'
             to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.    These
             compelling reasons constitute the 'exceptional  circumstances'
             referred to in rule 398.

         (4)  The justification for the courts giving  such  weight  to  the
             public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals is not
             simply that the Immigration Rules do so, it is that Parliament
             itself in section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  has  stipulated
             that deportation should be the usual consequence  of  criminal
             offending: see SS (Nigeria), para 54, where Lord Justice  Laws
             said that 'only a very strong claim indeed' could override the
             public interest.

         (5)  A consequence of the rules constituting a  comprehensive  code
             is that when exercising  the  residual  article  8  assessment
             where exceptional circumstances are relied upon, the  tribunal
             must carry out the assessment 'through the  lens  of  the  new
             rules' and that requires a recognition  of  very  considerable
             weight to be given to  the  public  interest  in  deportation.
             This distinguishes  the  foreign  criminal  cases  from  other
             article 8 cases, such as where the Secretary of State seeks to
             remove illegal immigrants in circumstances engaging article 8,
             where no single factor carries such dominant weight and a more
             general balancing exercise will be appropriate.

         (6)  When having regard to  the  public  interest  in  deportation,
             there are three important facets: the need  to  deter  foreign
             criminals from committing serious  crimes;  an  expression  of
             society's revulsion at  serious  crimes  and  building  public
             confidence in the treatment  of  foreign  criminals  who  have
             committed such crimes; and the risk of re-offending.  It is an
             error to assume that the risk of re-offending is the sole,  or
             even the  most  important,  facet  where  serious  crimes  are
             committed, referring  to  the  observations  of  Lord  Justice
             Wilson (as he then was) in OH (Serbia).

         (7)  It is not enough for a  tribunal  in  its  reasons  simply  to
             identify a  strong  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
             foreign criminals; there must be a  full  recognition  of  the
             very powerful weight to be given to that  factor  and  of  the
             need for compelling  factors  to  outweigh  it:  referring  to
             Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  MA  (Somalia)
             [2015] EWCA Civ 38 at para 25 per Lord Justice Richards.

12. In relation to the role of Appellate Tribunals Judge Beach referred  to
    Heshan Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 where it was stated:

         "It is the duty of appellate  tribunals,  as  independent  judicial
         bodies, to make their own  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of
         deportation in any particular  case  on  the  basis  of  their  own
         findings as to the facts and their understanding  of  the  relevant
         law.  But, where the Secretary of State has adopted a policy  based
         on a general assessment of proportionality, as in the present case,
         they should attach  considerable  weight  to  that  assessment:  in
         particular, that  a  custodial  sentence  of  four  years  or  more
         represents such a  serious  level  of  offending  that  the  public
         interest in the  offender's  deportation  almost  always  outweighs
         countervailing considerations of private or family life; that great
         weight should generally be given to  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of a foreign offender  who  has  received  a  custodial
         sentence of more than 12 months; and that, where the  circumstances
         do not fall within rules 399 or 399A, the public  interest  in  the
         deportation of such offenders can generally be outweighed  only  by
         countervailing factors which are very compelling."

13. Judge Beach then proceeded to allow ARB's appeal only in respect of one
    of the matters relied on, namely the effect deportation would  have  on
    the two children.  He observed that if they had to leave the UK  to  be
    with ARB they would lose the benefits  of  their  citizenship  with  an
    impact on them in terms of access to free health care and a significant
    change in education systems.  She  found  that  their  education  would
    suffer as a result of this when both were at crucial  stages  of  their
    education.  Taking account of all the circumstances including the  fact
    that they would  lose  regular  contact  with  their  peer  groups  and
    extended  family  who  live  in  the  UK   and   given   the   societal
    discrimination against Alevi Kurds in Turkey, they would be faced  with
    a real risk of being exposed to discrimination.

14. The next question for the judge was whether it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for the children to remain in the UK.  Judge Beach  observed  that  the
    evidence had established that they were a close family who would do all
    they could to assist  each  other.   She  then  stated  as  follows  at
    paragraph 95:

         "95. They are at particularly crucial stages of  their  development
             and as teenagers require the steady support of both parents or
             they run the risk of making the wrong decisions in the  future
             which will impact not only on them and their wider family  but
             also on society as a whole.  There was no suggestion that  the
             appellant was not a steady and  positive  influence  in  their
             lives and this was the thrust of the  evidence  from  all  the
             witnesses.

         96.  The public interest lies very strongly  in  deporting  foreign
             national criminals and  it  will  only  be  if  the  appellant
             fulfils the requirements  of  section  117C  that  deportation
             would not be appropriate.  I give significant  weight  to  the
             public interest in this case.  Equally  the  circumstances  of
             the appellant and his children must  also  be  considered.   I
             accept that the separation of  parent  and  child  can  be  an
             inevitable consequence of a foreign national offending  but  I
             also have regard to the very real effect that this would  have
             on the appellant's children.  This effect  goes  beyond  being
             merely uncomfortable and inconvenient and I  find  that  there
             will be a real and adverse emotional effect on the  children's
             development if the appellant is deported  from  the  UK.   For
             these reasons, I find that  the  effect  on  the  children  of
             remaining in the UK without  the  appellant  would  be  unduly
             harsh.

         98.   Taking  account  of  all  the  evidence  and   all   of   the
             circumstances cumulatively, I find that it is unduly harsh  to
             expect the children to leave the UK with the appellant  or  to
             remain in the UK without the  appellant  and  that  there  are
             therefore  exceptional  compelling   circumstances   in   this
             particular  appellant's  case  which  mean  that  the   public
             interest is outweighed and that the respondent has  not  shown
             that the decision is a necessary, justified  or  proportionate
             decision."

15. The Secretary of State has appealed against that decision on the  basis
    that there were material errors in law.  First, it  is  contended  that
    whilst the judge made reference to ARB's criminal conviction  as  being
    part of the assessment of what  is  unduly  harsh,  in  describing  the
    nature of that counter  element  she  failed  to  note  the  additional
    relevant aspect that ARB had denied two elements of the charges against
    him and continued  to  deny  responsibility  at  the  hearing.   It  is
    contended that this was plainly relevant to the underlying question  of
    risk of re-offending and the weight  to  be  ascribed  to  the  already
    formidable public interest and the judge was obliged to make a  finding
    on this herself.  However, in our judgment,  this  was  adequately  and
    properly dealt with by the judge in  the  decision  to  which  we  have
    referred.  She quoted fully at paragraph 81 of the judgment  the  Crown
    Court judge's sentencing remarks and  again  at  paragraph  82  and  he
    acknowledged that those sentencing remarks did raise concerning issues.
     She said at paragraph 85:

         "In general, I would not normally find that an offence  meant  that
         an appellant was not culturally or socially integrated  in  the  UK
         otherwise no appellant subject to deportation could even fulfil the
         criteria  of  that   exception.    However,   in   the   particular
         circumstances of this appellant I do have some concerns  about  his
         social integration into the UK given that the judge  noted  in  his
         sentencing remarks that there was evidence which strongly suggested
         that there was  a  'front'  company,  that  transactions  were  not
         properly noted for the purposes of accountability  and  that  money
         was being siphoned out of the UK.  These are all issues that  raise
         some concern about the level of the  appellant's  integration  into
         the UK."

16. Furthermore,  she  was  concerned  at  the  failure  of  ARB  fully  to
    acknowledge his guilt and ARB's continuing assertion  before  her  when
    giving evidence that he did not have the necessary criminal mens rea in
    relation to the offences for which he had been convicted.  In our  view
    the judge took full account  of  those  factors  in  carrying  out  the
    weighing exercise that she did when she reached her decision and it  is
    not reasonably arguable that she failed to do so given  the  prominence
    which she attached to the conviction - not surprisingly given that  the
    conviction was the reason for deportation and the circumstances  of  it
    and the reaction of ARB to his conviction.

17. Next it is asserted on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    judge's formulation of the public interest in this case was unlawful by
    reason of her failure to have express regard to its manifold nature  in
    respect of its deterrent threat as set out in the  case  of  AM  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1634 at paragraph 24 where it was stated:

         "Deportation in pursuit of the legitimate aim of  preventing  crime
         and disorder is not, therefore, to be seen  as  one-dimensional  in
         its effect. It has the effect not only of removing the risk of  re-
         offending by the deportee himself,  but  also  of  deterring  other
         foreign nationals in a similar position.  Furthermore,  deportation
         of foreign criminals preserves public confidence  in  a  system  of
         control whose loss would itself tend towards crime and disorder."

18. However, as has been pointed out by Ms Shaw  who  has  represented  ARB
    before us, the judge made full reference to the later  decision  of  AJ
    (Zimbabwe) to which we have referred earlier in this judgment  and  the
    principles there set out incorporate all the principles which had  been
    set out in AM and indeed go further and we do not accept that a failure
    to refer to AM itself betrays any error of law on the part of the judge
    when he has referred to AJ (Zimbabwe) and the principles to be applied.



19. Third, it is  suggested  that  the  factors  listed  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 93 as justifying his finding that leaving  the  UK  would  be
    unduly harsh do not individually  or  cumulatively  meet  the  required
    level of harshness.  We have no doubt that the factors referred  to  by
    the judge do meet that level in relation to the issue of  the  children
    leaving the UK and that the factors relied upon by the judge were  more
    than adequate to justify her finding that  re-settling  them  would  be
    unduly harsh.

20. Fourth, it is suggested that the findings in respect of the  children's
    Alevi Kurdish identity was manifestly unlawful as this was not  a  view
    directly  expressed  by  the  children   and   was   therefore   "utter
    speculation", to quote from the grounds of appeal, and it is said  that
    there  was  no  evidence  whereby  the  judge   could   conclude   that
    discrimination against Alevis was so pervasive that it would  have  any
    material effect on the children, in practice.  This is really  subsumed
    within the third ground but in any event Ms Shaw  has  referred  us  to
    country guidance from 2017 which firms up the country guidance from the
    previous year and suggests that discrimination against  Alevis  is  now
    more than merely a possibility but happens in fact.

21. Finally, it is submitted that the analysis of the judge at paragraph 95
    of the decision in relation to the requirements of Rule 399(a) and  (b)
    amounted to a material dilution of the legal test in that the judge was
    in reality equating the test to one of reasonableness.  We  have  found
    this the most difficult of the issues which have been  raised  in  this
    case and we have considered  with  some  concern  whether  the  factors
    relied upon by Judge Beach, at paragraph 95 in fact go beyond the  test
    which was set out by the Court of Appeal in the case of  AJ  (Zimbabwe)
    in relation to what  is  always  a  consequence  of  deportation  where
    children are left behind.

22. In the course of the hearing Judge Kopieczek raised with  Ms  Shaw  the
    statement in the judgment  of  Lord  Justice  Elias  in  that  case  at
    paragraph 13 where he said:

         "This court has on a number of occasions  had  cause  to  emphasise
         that the mere fact that there will be a detrimental effect  on  the
         best interests of the children where the parent (almost always  the
         father) is deported in  circumstances  where  the  children  cannot
         follow  him  does  not  by   itself   constitute   an   exceptional
         circumstance"

    And further, at paragraph 17:

         "These cases show that it will be rare for the  best  interests  of
         the children to outweigh the strong public  interest  in  deporting
         foreign criminals. Something more than a lengthy separation from  a
         parent is required, even though such separation is  detrimental  to
         the  child's  best  interests.  That  is  commonplace  and  not   a
         compelling circumstance. Neither is it looking at  the  concept  of
         exceptional circumstances  through  the  lens  of  the  Immigration
         Rules. It would undermine the specific exceptions in the  Rules  if
         the interests of the children in maintaining a close and  immediate
         relationship with the deported parent were as a matter of course to
         trump the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation.  Rule  399(a)
         identifies the particular circumstances where it is  accepted  that
         the interests of the child will outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         deportation. The conditions are onerous and will only rarely arise.
         They include the requirement that it would not  be  reasonable  for
         the child to leave the UK and that no other family member  is  able
         to look after the child in the UK. In  many,  if  not  most,  cases
         where this exception is  potentially  engaged  there  will  be  the
         normal relationship of love and affection between parent and  child
         and it is virtually always in the best interests of the  child  for
         that relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
         deportation a disproportionate interference with  family  life,  it
         would drain the rule of any practical significance. It  would  mean
         that deportation would constitute a  disproportionate  interference
         with private life in the ordinary run of cases where  children  are
         adversely affected and the  carefully  framed  conditions  in  rule
         399(a) would be largely  otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very
         compelling justification overriding the  high  public  interest  in
         deportation, there must be  some  additional  feature  or  features
         affecting the nature or quality of the relationship which take  the
         case out of the ordinary. "

23.  It is in that context that the various factors  relied  upon  by  Judge
    Beach at paragraph 95 are important.  The factors which she quoted were
    as follows:

         "The children are at crucial stages in their lives  and  education.
         One is in his GCSE years and the other is in her first  year  of  A
         levels.  The appellant's daughter is  a  talented  gymnast  by  all
         accounts.  The appellant's daughter has described  in  her  witness
         statement her  emotional  distress  at  being  separated  from  the
         appellant when he was in prison and has spoken of her real worry at
         being separated from him again and the emotional impact this  would
         have on her.  She has also spoken of the adverse effect on her  day
         to day life and her ability to concentrate on her education  whilst
         the  appellant  was  in  prison  and  her  stress  at  the  current
         uncertainty regarding the appellant.  Whilst she is growing into an
         adult, a father figure will also play a  significant  role  in  her
         life and in her development in happy and healthy  relationships  in
         the future.  The relationship between a father and son  is  perhaps
         even more important at the  age  of  the  appellant's  son  who  is
         currently 15 years old.  The appellant's  son  also  talks  of  his
         strong relationship with the appellant in  his  witness  statement.
         He also speaks of the emotional distress which he  faced  when  the
         appellant was in prison and the effect on him if the appellant were
         deported from the UK.  The separation of  a  parent  and  child  is
         known to have a real emotional impact  on  a  child  who  can  then
         struggle to form healthy relationships in the  future.   There  has
         already been  a  demonstration  of  the  emotional  impact  on  the
         children  described  in  their  witness  statements.   Whilst   the
         appellant's children are of an age when they can better  understand
         the reason why the appellant is not in the  UK  it  should  not  be
         forgotten that they are still teenagers and will struggle to  fully
         understand the reasons for the separation.   Being  teenagers  also
         has an impact on their emotional needs.  They are  at  particularly
         crucial stages of their development and as  teenagers  require  the
         steady support of both parents or they run the risk of  making  the
         wrong decisions in the future which will impact not  only  on  them
         and their wider family but also on society as whole."

24.  Although, as we have said, we have had some concern as to  whether  the
    factors relied upon by the First-tier Tribunal Judge could be  said  in
    law to amount to fulfilling the test  of  undue  harshness  beyond  the
    effect which all deportations of  foreign  criminals  will  necessarily
    have where that means separation from their children,  in  the  end  we
    have taken the view that Judge Beach correctly directed herself in law,
    she had full regard to the legal principles as set  out  fully  in  her
    careful judgment, she did undertake a  proper  weighing  process  which
    would have included the weighing up of the fact that in the calendar of
    offences this cannot by any means be said to be  the  most  serious  of
    criminality and decided that, having weighed those matters, the  public
    interest  in  deportation  was  on  this  occasion  outweighed  by  the
    compelling circumstances raised by the interests of the  children.   In
    those circumstances in our view there was no material error of law  and
    we would dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law. Accordingly, the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
dismissed, and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow  the  appeal
therefore stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 27 February 2018

Mr Justice Martin Spencer
