
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00022/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                           |On 23 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     ASM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant, who is a citizen of  Somalia,  appeals  with  permission
    against a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M  Loughridge)
    which dismissed his appeal under the Refugee Convention, Art  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive and Art 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The appellant came to the UK in February 2000 and claimed asylum.  On 1
    August 2000, he was recognised as  a  refugee  and  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain.

 4. During his time in the UK, the appellant has been convicted of a number
    of drugs related offences.  On 22 May 2009, he  was  convicted  at  the
    Ipswich Crown Court of possessing a Class A controlled drug with intent
    to supply, namely heroin.  On 19 June 2009, he was sentenced  to  three
    years' detention in a Young Offenders  Institution.   On  26  September
    2009, he was served with notice that he  was  liable  to  be  deported.
    However, having raised a  claim  under  Art  8,  on  10  May  2011  the
    appellant was issued with a warning letter but the issue of deportation
    was taken no further.

 5. On 16 March  2015,  at  the  Swansea  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
    convicted of an offence of possessing a Class  B  controlled  drug  and
    possession of a Class A controlled drug with intent to  supply,  namely
    heroin.  On 8 April 2015, the appellant was sentenced  to  five  years'
    imprisonment.

 6. On 14 December 2015, the appellant was served with notice of a decision
    to deport him under the automatic  deportation  provisions  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

 7. Following further submissions, the appellant was notified on  24  March
    2007 of the respondent's intention to  cease  his  refugee  status.   A
    deportation order against the appellant was signed on 15 December 2017.



 8. On 29 January 2018, the Secretary of State made a  decision  to  refuse
    the appellant international protection and human rights claims and took
    a decision to revoke his protection status.

 9. The appellant appealed that decision and it is against the decision  of
    Judge  Loughridge  dismissing  his  appeal  on  all  grounds  that  the
    appellant now appeals.

10. Before me, Ms Aboni, represented the Secretary of State.  Having  heard
    submissions from Mr Joseph representing  the  appellant,  she  accepted
    that the Secretary of State had been wrong to  revoke  the  appellant's
    international protection status.  She  accepted  that  the  basis  upon
    which it was now proposed that the appellant could  return  to  Somalia
    was that he could internally  relocate  to  Mogadishu  even  though  it
    remained unsafe for him to return to his  home  area  of  Kismayo.   Ms
    Aboni accepted that the possibility of internal relocation, was not, as
    a result of the Upper Tribunal's decision in MS (Art 1C(5) - Mogadishu)
    Somalia [2018] UKUT 196 (IAC), a  sufficient  change  in  circumstances
    (being limited to only one part of the country of proposed  return)  to
    justify the revocation of the appellant's refugee  status  pursuant  to
    Art 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention.

11. After further submissions from  both  representatives,  it  was  common
    ground that the proper disposal of the appellant's appeal should be  in
    accordance with the Upper Tribunal's decision in  Essa  (Revocation  of
    protection status appeals) [2018] UKUT 244 (IAC).

12. Mr Joseph accepted, as the judge had  decided,  that  s.72(10)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  applied  as  the  s.72
    certification was justified.  In those circumstances,  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds must be dismissed.  Although Judge  Loughridge
    had dismissed (he used the words "reject[ed]") the  appellant's  appeal
    on Refugee Convention grounds, he had done so on a wrong basis  in  the
    light of MS and it was common ground between the parties that I  should
    substitute a decision dismissing the Refugee Convention appeal on  that
    ground.   Consequently,  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the   Refugee
    Convention is dismissed as required by  s.72(10)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002").

13. Nevertheless, it was also accepted that the appellant's appeal  against
    the decision to revoke his refugee status should have succeeded as  the
    revocation was  not  in  accordance  with  Art  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  Both representatives indicated that, in that regard,  this
    appeal should be disposed of in the same terms as set out  in  [21]  of
    the Upper Tribunal's decision in Essa.

14. Although the appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds, as I am required by
    s.86(1)(a) of the NIA Act 2002, I conclude that the ground of appeal in
    s.84(3)(a) of the 2002 Act is made out.  The  decision  to  revoke  his
    status breaches the Refugee Convention.  The effect  of  that  is  that
    although the appeal is formally dismissed, the Secretary of State is on
    notice that the provisions of the Refugee Convention continue to  apply
    to the appellant and (whether  or  not  he  is  granted  leave)  he  is
    entitled to them, as set out in Arts 2-30 of  the  Refugee  Convention,
    including access to  the  labour  market  and  welfare.   Although  the
    appellant's appeal is formally dismissed, his status under the  Refugee
    Convention is not affected.

15. Mr Joseph also raised  a  point  concerning  the  judge's  decision  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8.  He accepted that, although
    the grounds of appeal challenge the judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under Art 8, the specific point he now wished to rely on was not
    raised.  Ms Aboni did not object to this 'elaboration' of the  grounds.
    Indeed, having heard Mr Joseph's submissions, Ms  Aboni  accepted  that
    the judge had been wrong in law to dismiss the appellant's appeal under
    Art 8 and that the proper  decision  was  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed under Art 8.

16. In applying s.117C of the NIA Act 2002, the judge treated the appellant
    as  a  "foreign  criminal"  who  had  been  sentenced  to  a  term   of
    imprisonment of "four years or more" such that, by virtue of s.117C(6):



         "the public interest requires the deportation unless there are very
         compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described   in
         Exception 1 and 2."   (my emphasis)

17. At para 53 of his determination, Judge Loughridge found that  Exception
    1 (set out in s.117C(4)) did apply to the appellant,  in  that  he  had
    been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life;  he
    was socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and there  were  very
    significant obstacles  to  his  integration  into  Somalia  on  return.
    However, the judge went on to find that there were not "very compelling
    circumstances over and above" those in Exception 1.

18. Mr Joseph pointed out that the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  treat  the
    appellant as a person who had been sentenced to a term of  imprisonment
    of "four years or more".  Whilst he  had  been  sentenced  to  a  total
    period of imprisonment of five years, this  was  as  a  result  of  two
    consecutive sentences - one of three years' imprisonment and the other
    of two years' imprisonment.   By  virtue  of  s.117D(4)(b),  Mr  Joseph
    pointed out, that consecutive sentences could not be aggregated for the
    purposes of determining a "period of imprisonment of a  certain  length
    of time", i.e. whether the appellant had been convicted of  a  term  of
    imprisonment of "four years or more".  Mr  Joseph  submitted  that  the
    judge had, therefore, been wrong in law to restrict  the  appellant  to
    the application of s.117C(6).  The appellant was entitled  to  succeed,
    because he would demonstrate that his deportation was not in the public
    interest, if Exception 1 under s.117C(4) applied because he fell within
    s.117C(3) as a person who had  "not  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of four years or more".  Ms Aboni agreed that Mr  Joseph's
    submissions were correct.  The judge had  been  wrong  to  require  the
    appellant to demonstrate "very compelling circumstances over and above"
    those in Exception 1.  She accepted that the judge had been entitled to
    find that the appellant fell with Exception 1 and  that  therefore  the
    public interest did not require his deportation.  She accepted that the
    judge's decision to dismiss the appeal under Art 8 should be set  aside
    and the decision remade allowing the appeal under Art 8.

19. I agree with Mr Joseph's submission.  Judge Loughridge erred in law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.   Given  his
    finding in para  53  that  Exception  1  in  s.117C(4)  applied,  Judge
    Loughridge should have allowed the appellant's appeal under  Art  8  on
    the basis that the public interest did not require his deportation.   I
    set aside Judge Loughridge's decision in respect of Art  8  and  remake
    the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            10, January 2019
