
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00148/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th April 2019                    |On 20th May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               Mr Mohamed [Y]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Fripp, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent Mr [Y] is a  national  of  Somalia  date  of  birth  1th
    September 1996. On the 23rd January 2019 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Hodgkinson) allowed,  on  protection  grounds,  his  appeal  against  a
    decision to deport him. The Secretary of State now  has  permission  to
    appeal against that decision.


 2. The following matters are not in  dispute.   Mr  [Y]  arrived  in  this
    country in 2002 when he was five years old. The following year he,  his
    mother and brother were all  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as
    refugees. On the 13th January 2017 Mr [Y] was convicted, upon a  guilty
    plea, of possession of Class A drugs (heroin and cocaine)  with  intent
    to supply: he was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.   This followed
    an earlier conviction for possession of  cannabis  and  theft.    As  a
    result of these convictions the Respondent took  action  to  deport  Mr
    [Y].

 3. Section 32(1)-(5) of the United Kingdom Borders Act 2007 provides, that
    subject to the exceptions in section 33 of the Act,  the  Secretary  of
    State must take action to  deport  a  foreign  criminal  who  was  been
    convicted of a crime in the United Kingdom for which he has received  a
    sentence of 12 months or more.   'Exception 1' in section  33  is  that
    the automatic deportation provisions shall not apply where  a  person's
    removal would place the United Kingdom in  breach  of  its  obligations
    under either a) the Refugee Convention or b) the European Convention on
    Human Rights.

 4. The first question for the First-tier Tribunal was therefore whether Mr
    [Y] was subject to  'automatic  deportation'.   Having  regard  to  the
    length of his sentence of  imprisonment  it  found  that  he  was,  and
    neither party has any complaint about that.

 5. The second question was whether the Secretary of  State  was  prevented
    from actually deporting him because of the United Kingdom's obligations
    under the Refugee Convention.

 6. In his refusal letter dated 19th September 2018 the Secretary of  State
    had imposed a 'section 72 certificate', that is a finding that Mr  [Y],
    having received a criminal sentence of more than 2 years, was  presumed
    to be a 'particularly serious criminal' by virtue of  s72  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  that  as  such  he  constitutes  a
    danger to the community. By Article 33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention
    signatory states are entitled to  refuse  international  protection  to
    those they regard as 'particularly  serious  criminals';  by  paragraph
    339D of the Immigration Rules this exclusion  extends  to  Humanitarian
    Protection.  The Judge had regard to the very serious nature of dealing
    Class A drugs, and set out the sentencing remarks of the trial judge in
    full. He read the evidence provided by the probation  service,  Mr  [Y]
    himself and an additional witness, a key worker with a charity who  had
    worked closely with Mr [Y] whilst he was incarcerated in  HMP  Brixton.
    Having done so the Judge was satisfied that the presumption in s72  was
    rebutted. Although Mr [Y] had been sentenced to 30 months'  in  prison,
    the First-tier Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  he  does  not  currently
    constitutes a danger to the community and quashed the s72  certificate.




 7. There is no challenge to that finding.  That is not, however,  the  end
    of the matter. As well as attempting to exclude Mr [Y] from the benefit
    of the Convention the Secretary of State further sought to  argue  that
    his refugee status had  ceased.  In  his  letter  he  argued  that  the
    situation had markedly changed in Somalia since Mr [Y] and  his  mother
    were granted refugee status, to the extent that it could no  longer  be
    said that he faced a real risk of harm if returned there.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not agree. It referred itself to the country guidance
    in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442,  to
    more recent country background information, to the views  expressed  by
    UNHCR and the expert witness Dr Hoehne. It had regard to the fact  that
    Mr [Y] left Mogadishu when he was 2 years old, that he is effectively a
    stranger there with no connections to the city, that he  is  unable  to
    speak  fluent  Somali,  is  unskilled  and  without   any   discernible
    employment  prospects,  and  importantly,   to  the  substance  of  his
    mother's original claim for asylum -  that  they  are  members  of  the
    Ashraf minority clan. Having directed itself to the  appropriate  legal
    test when considering cessation  of  status,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    concluded that the circumstances in connection with which  Mr  [Y]  has
    been recognised as a refugee have not ceased  to  exist.  The  Tribunal
    therefore allowed Mr [Y]'s appeal on  both  refugee  and  human  rights
    grounds, finding in respect of the latter that its conclusions on  risk
    led to a positive disposal on Article  8  (paragraph  399A  Immigration
    Rules).


 8. It is that decision that is at the centre of this appeal.


    The Grounds of Appeal

 9. The Secretary of State submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    the following material respects:


        i) It should have followed the guidance in MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA
           Civ 944;


       ii) It should have rejected the claim that the family are Ashraf;

      iii) Even if that were accepted, the Tribunal erred  in  placing  any
           weight on  their  claimed  ethnicity  in  its  risk  assessment,
           contrary to MOJ;

       iv) The finding that Mr [Y] would find it difficult to find work  is
           contrary to the conclusions in MOJ.

    The Response

10. In respect of the country guidance Mr Fripp submitted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not depart from the findings of the Upper Tribunal in
    MOJ, and insofar as the grounds suggest that it did, they are mistaken.
    Although the  Tribunal  there  found  that  the  significance  of  clan
    membership has changed, it did not find that it was wholly  irrelevant.
    In this case it was plainly relevant, since it was at the heart  of  Mr
    [Y]'s inability to access social,  economic  and  physical  support  in
    Mogadishu.  But  for  his  minority  clan  membership  he  would   have
    connections in the  city  to  help  him  financially,  gain  access  to
    employment and housing, and to whom  he  could  turn  for  basic  human
    interaction. Absent those connections and support he is in an extremely
    vulnerable position. That finding was  neither  inconsistent  with  the
    findings in MOJ nor with the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.


    Discussion and Findings

11. I deal first with the factual issue in dispute.  When  she  arrived  in
    this country in 2002 Mr [Y]'s mother told the authorities that she  and
    her sons were members of the Hassan sub-clan of  the  Ashraf  minority.
    She also gave a narrative of recent persecution in Somalia.  They  were
    all granted asylum. In the course of these proceedings Mr [Y] explained
    that immediately prior to the family's arrival in  the  United  Kingdom
    they had in fact spent approximately three years  in  the  Netherlands.
    This necessarily meant that some  of  what  his  mother  had  told  the
    authorities upon her arrival was untrue: the recent persecution  events
    described by her could not have taken place because she was in  Holland
    at the time. The First-tier Tribunal gave what I  find  to  be  careful
    consideration to  this  matter.   At  paragraphs  59-63  it  notes  the
    inconsistencies in the evidence,  and  expressly  considers  the  HOPOs
    submission that if Mr [Y]'s mother was lying about  those  matters,  it
    could be assumed she was lying about everything. The Tribunal notes  Mr
    [Y]'s evidence that he has been  brought  up  to  believe  that  he  is
    Ashraf, and that this is what he has been consistently told by both his
    mother and father, who is also now a refugee in the United Kingdom.  It
    notes that the Secretary of State's refusal  letter  expressly  accepts
    the claimed  identity.  Considering  the  evidence  in  the  round  the
    Tribunal finds that it would be  too  great  a  speculative  'leap'  to
    conclude that this claimed ethnic identity was  false.  Asylum  seekers
    may tell untruths about some matters and be  telling  the  truth  about
    others. One lie does not necessarily mean everything the liar  says  in
    untrue.


12. I find no error of law or logic in that  reasoning.  The  Tribunal  had
    heard live evidence from Mr [Y] which it was entitled  to  believe;  it
    was logically permissible to place weight on the fact that he had grown
    up to believe that he was Ashraf; it was entitled to assume  that  when
    the Immigration Adjudicator allowed the mother's appeal back in 2003 he
    or she did so having conducted a careful evaluation  of  the  evidence.
    The Tribunal's approach is here entirely consonant with that  taken  by
    Sir John Dyson in MA (Somalia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] UKSC 49:


         "21. For appellants who appeal to the AIT in Refugee Convention or
         Article 3 cases, the stakes are often extremely high. The
         consequences of failure for those whose cases are genuine are
         usually grave. It is not, therefore, surprising that appellants
         frequently give fabricated evidence in order to bolster their
         cases".


13. I am therefore unable to find any reason to interfere with  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's finding that Mr [Y] is from a minority clan.


14. The Secretary of State submits that even if that finding is upheld, the
    Tribunal's risk assessment is flawed.

15. I do not understand what the relevance of MA (Somalia) [2018] might be.
    That case addressed the issue of internal  flight  in  the  context  of
    cessation,  with  the  Court  of  Appeal  concluding  that  since   the
    assessment of cessation must be a mirror image  of  the  assessment  of
    risk, that must include an examination of internal flight alternatives.
     That issue did not arise in this appeal, since Mr  [Y]'s  family  hail
    from Reer Hamar, a district of Mogadishu. The Secretary  of  State  was
    not proposing any alternative: see paragraph 80 of  the  determination.
    The proposed place of return was the capital, and on the facts,  if  he
    at risk there, he is at risk anywhere.

16. The real issue is whether the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  find
    Mr [Y] to still be at risk in  Somalia,  applying  the  extant  country
    guidance in MOJ.   The Secretary of State  submits  that  the  Tribunal
    impermissibly departed from that guidance in  three  ways.  First,  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to recognise the central conclusion  in  MOJ
    that there is in general no risk to  ordinary  civilians.  Second,  the
    weight it places on his Ashraf identity is at odds  with  the  guidance
    that "clan membership is not a risk factor". Third, it fails to explain
    in what way Mr [Y] would be unable to take advantage of  the  "economic
    boom" in the city.

17. I deal first with clan membership. This had long been a factor of great
    significance in Somali asylum  appeals,  with  the  general  view  that
    minority clans faced a real risk of  persecution  prevailing  since  at
    least 1994. MOJ was the first departure from this orthodoxy.  Heard  in
    2014 after the routing of Al-Shabaab and  more  than  twenty  years  of
    civil war the Tribunal concluded:

         (viii) The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has
         changed. Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms
         and assist with access to livelihoods, performing less of a
         protection function than previously. There are no clan militias in
         Mogadishu, no clan violence, and no clan based discriminatory
         treatment, even for minority clan members.

18. The First-tier Tribunal in this case clearly directed  itself  to  that
    conclusion; indeed the determination sets out verbatim the detailed and
    lengthy 'reasons for refusal' letter which adopts the reasoning in  MOJ
    and expands upon it.  The Tribunal then sets out  the  evidence  relied
    upon by Mr Fripp.  At paragraph 68 it replicates extracts from the June
    2017 Country Policy Information Note (CPIN) Somalia: Majority Clans and
    Minority Groups in South and Central Somalia to the effect  that  "clan
    affiliation is the main identity-providing  factor  within  the  Somali
    nation". The same document explains that  clan  protection  remains  an
    important factor in the day to day lives of  Somalis:  "in  case  of  a
    crime, Somalis would rather go to their clan  than  the  police".   The
    CPIN further cites the US State Department Report  published  in  March
    2017:


         "Minority groups, often lacking  armed  militias,  continue  to  be
         disproportionately subjected to killings, torture, rape, kidnapping
         for ransom, and looting of  land  and  property  with  impunity  by
         faction  militias  and  majority  clan  members,  often  with   the
         acquiescence  of  federal  and  local  authorities.  Many  minority
         communities continued to live in deep poverty and  to  suffer  from
         numerous forms of discrimination and exclusion".


    It further cites the UNHCR  position  paper  of  May  2016  to  similar
    effect.


19. The Tribunal then sets out the extent of Mr Fripp's submissions on that
    evidence at paragraph 70. The point was that MOJ  may  well  have  been
    correct in identifying a sea-change in the nature  of  the  civil  war,
    which for many years had been clan based,  but  the  reality  was  that
    Somali society itself had  not  changed.  The  clan  remains  the  most
    important factor in determining an individual's relationship  with  the
    outside world:


         "there was no sufficiency of protection  from  the  authorities  in
         Mogadishu or Somalia for somebody such as the appellant, who  would
         be vulnerable in any event, bearing in mind that he was essentially
         a stranger to Mogadishu, who had not lived in Somalia since he  was
         2 years old, he now being 22 years old".

20. That is the reasoning accepted by the Tribunal.  The  relevance  of  Mr
    [Y]'s clan membership was not that would be  caught  up  in  inter-clan
    warfare; it was that it left him without protection, protection that he
    would likely need, given his other vulnerabilities.   Mr [Y]  would  be
    returned to Mogadishu with no discernible skills  in  the  job  market,
    speaking broken Somali  which  would  immediately  identify  him  as  a
    returnee, with no contacts in the city.  In  those  circumstances,  the
    Tribunal concluded, the risks identified inter alia by UNHCR and the US
    State Department (evidence replicated in the Secretary of  State's  own
    CPIN) became highly relevant.  I am satisfied that these  were  matters
    that the Tribunal was entitled to weigh in the balance.


21. As to the "general" conclusion in MOJ that ordinary civilians  are  not
    at risk, I find nothing in the First-tier Tribunal decision to indicate
    that this is a finding that it departed from. The point was that Mr [Y]
    is not,  for  the  reasons  identified,  an  'ordinary'  civilian.  The
    Tribunal properly directed itself to  the  considerations  set  out  at
    paragraph (ix) of the headnote in MOJ and conducted its  assessment  in
    light of those matters.


22. Finally the Secretary of State disagrees with the  conclusion  that  Mr
    [Y] would be unable to avail himself of the opportunities  afforded  by
    the 'economic boom' discussed in MOJ. The guidance given by  the  Upper
    Tribunal was that it would be for individual  appellants  to  establish
    why they would be vulnerable to destitution, taking  into  account  the
    following matters:

         (xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those
         who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live
         in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)  risk  or
         facing a real risk of destitution. On the other hand, relocation in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no former  links  to
         the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards.

23. It was the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that Mr [Y] fell squarely
    into that risk category described at the end of that paragraph.    That
    was a finding open to it on the evidence, and it properly  applied  the
    country guidance.  No error of law arises.




      Decisions


24. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contain no  error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


25. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                15th May
                                    2019
