
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/00430/2013
     VA/00434/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 June 2014                                 |On 15 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                  mr Zaroob
                             mrs Riffat Parween
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - abu dhabi

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, Mr Zaroob and Riffat Parween, are citizens of  Pakistan
    born respectively on 4 November 1978 and 27 April 1984 and are  husband
    and wife.  They appealed against the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) Abu Dhabi dated 21 November 2013  to  refuse  them  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as visitors.  The appellants applied to
    visit their United Kingdom  sponsor,  the  first  appellant's  brother,
    Mahroof Akhtar (hereafter the sponsor).  The appeals of the  appellants
    in the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  dismissed  by  Judge  Hillis  in  a
    determination promulgated on  4  February  2014.   The  appellants  now
    appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Insofar as the grounds are anything more than a disagreement  with  the
    findings of the Immigration Judge,  they  assert  that  the  appellant,
    having found that no false document had been used contrary to paragraph
    320(7) of the Immigration Rules and having accepted the sponsor  was  a
    credible witness should have attached more weight  to  the  documentary
    evidence relating to the financial circumstances of the appellants.

 3. I found that the judge did not err in his approach to  or  analysis  of
    the evidence.  Whilst at [27] the judge found that the  respondent  had
    failed to prove that false documents had been used in  the  application
    but at [28] he gave reasons for doubting the credibility of the account
    contained in the documentary evidence.  In particular, he did not  find
    it credible the appellants would seek to travel to the  United  Kingdom
    for a family holiday when they were expecting  the  imminent  birth  of
    their child.  Further, the judge noted that the appellants had provided
    a copy of a bank statement for the period 1  July  2012  -  31  October
    2012.  The judge found that the closing balance shown  on  the  account
    was not consistent with the first appellant's claimed seasonal  income.
    The judge noted that there was "no persuasive  evidence  before  me  to
    show the source of the excess of deposits  over  his  claimed  income".
    Those were clearly findings available to the judge on the evidence  and
    which entitled the judge to find that, whilst false  evidence  had  not
    been shown to have been used in the application, the evidence  provided
    was unclear or insufficient to discharge  the  burden  of  proof  which
    rested upon the appellants.  That finding properly  led  the  judge  to
    dismiss the appeal under paragraph 41 of HC 395 and  there  is,  in  my
    opinion, nothing in the grounds of appeal  which  would  indicate  that
    that finding is unsafe in law.

DECISION

 4. These appeals are dismissed.






Signed                              Date 8 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
