
IAC-TH-LW/AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: va/00573/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2014 and 8 January 2015        |On 16 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                    Helene Rachel Tchuembou Epse Tchuente
                         (anonymity Order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       entry clearance officer - accra
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born on 10 January 1947.  She is
    sponsored by her son, Christian who is a British citizen.

 2. On 23 December 2013 she applied for entry clearance as a family visitor
    to see the Sponsor.  On 15 January  2014  the  Respondent  refused  the
    application  because  he  was  not  satisfied  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules (the IRs) and in particular  that
    she would be a genuine visitor and intended to leave the United Kingdom
    at the end of her proposed visit as required by  paragraphs  41(i)  and
    41(ii).  He had noted  that  on  her  previous  application  for  entry
    clearance which had been granted she had stated that she would stay for
    two weeks and in fact had stayed for more than three months.

 3. Additionally, the Respondent refused the application under the  general
    grounds of paragraph 320(7A) of  the  IRs  because  the  Appellant  had
    failed to declare that she had on three previous occasions been refused
    a visa by the French authorities.

The First-tier Tribunal proceedings

 4. On 27 January 2014, through her then solicitors, she lodged  notice  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are generic and lacking in
    any particularity.  They include a note  that  detailed  grounds  would
    follow but none have, although for the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  on
    21 August 2014 the Appellant was represented and a bundle for  her  had
    been filed.

 5. By a determination promulgated on 27 August 2014 Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Eldridge found the Appellant did satisfy the requirements
    of paragraphs 41(i) and 41(ii) of the IRs and that the  Respondent  had
    been in error when refusing the application  under  paragraph  320(7A).
    He considered the Respondent had not established that the Appellant had
    been dishonest and intended to misrepresent the position when  she  had
    lodged the original  application  for  entry  clearance.  He  cited  AA
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ.773  which  concerned  the  effect  of
    innocent misrepresentation in immigration law and concluded:-

         ...  Under the  Razgar  five-step  approach  I  find  there  is  an
         interference with family life between mother and  son.   Because  I
         find the Appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  41  and  the
         Respondent was not entitled to refuse under paragraph 320(7A),  the
         decision cannot be lawful, justified or proportionate.

    He concluded that the decision under appeal was  "not  compatible  with
    Article 8" and went on to allow the appeal and make a whole  fee  award
    on the basis that a fee award should normally follow the  event  if  an
    appeal was allowed.

Permission to Appeal

6.   The ECO sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the  Judge  had
    failed to engage appropriately with the reasons why the  Applicant  had
    failed to leave the United Kingdom on her  previous  visit  until  long
    after the two weeks which she had stated she intended for her visit but
    within the permitted period of her leave.  The Applicant had failed  to
    explain why she had not left until much later and so  the  decision  to
    refuse her entry clearance under paragraph 41(ii) was correct  in  law.
    The second ground was that the Judge had failed to have regard  to  the
    public interest factors outlined in Section 117B of the  2002  Act  and
    this amounted to a material error of law.

The Upper Tribunal Hearings

 7. The Appellant's son, her sponsor, attended the hearing.   On  the  date
    before the November hearing the  Appellant's  solicitors  notified  the
    Tribunal  they  were  no  longer  instructed.   Mr  Melvin  handed   up
    additional submissions for the Respondent together with  the  judgments
    in ZB (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 834 and AAO v ECO  [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 840 and the determination in ECO Dhaka  v  SB  [2002]  UKIAT  02212
    which is generally known as Shamim Box.

 8. For the ECO Mr Melvin submitted that the Judge had not engaged with the
    Appellant's failure to explain why she had not left after a  fortnight,
    being the proposed length of her previous visit to the United  Kingdom.



 9. The Judge had erred in considering the appeal by way  of  reference  to
    the Immigration Rules because  the  Appellant's  right  of  appeal  was
    limited to human rights and racial discrimination grounds following the
    coming into force of the amendments to Section  88A  of  the  2002  Act
    effected by Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act  2013  brought  into
    force on decisions made subsequent to 25 June 2013.

10. He continued that the Judge's treatment of the claim  under  Article  8
    outside the IRs was inadequately reasoned and there was  no  assessment
    of the proportionality of the decision under appeal to  the  legitimate
    public objectives contained in Article 8(2).  The  close  bond  between
    the Appellant and her Sponsor son was insufficient reason to  find  the
    decision was such an interference to  family  life  as  to  engage  the
    state's obligations under Article 8.

11. I summarised the submissions to the Sponsor in layman's terms  as  well
    as the basic principles applying to claims made under Article 8 of  the
    European Convention.  I noted  to  Mr  Melvin  for  the  ECO  that  the
    authorities he had submitted related mainly  to  removal  or  expulsion
    cases or family re-union cases, and asked what authority there  was  in
    respect of out of country visitor appeals other than the  determination
    in Shamim Box.  I indicated that  I  was  concerned  about  a  lack  of
    authority or guidance on the application of Article 8 jurisprudence  to
    visitor entry clearance cases and was minded to find that there  was  a
    material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal determination.

Consideration

12. I was satisfied the Judge's consideration of the appeal in relation  to
    Article 8 of the European Convention contained a material error of law.
     The Judge had failed to take into account that the grounds  of  appeal
    available to the  Appellant  was  limited  to  human  rights  and  race
    discrimination and a finding that the Appellant had  in  fact  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the IRs by itself was  insufficient  to
    show that the refusal of entry  clearance  was  disproportionate  to  a
    legitimate public objective.  The Judge's treatment of the claim  under
    Article 8 was cursory and failed specifically to take into account  the
    factors affecting the public interest identified in Section 117B of the
    2002 Act which had come into force some three weeks before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.

13. By reason of the lack of authority I decided that the appeal should  be
    heard in the Upper Tribunal.

The Resumed Hearing

14. The resumed hearing was set for 8 January.  The Appellant  applied  for
    an adjournment because the Sponsor would not be  able  to  attend.   No
    explanation why he would be unable to attend was given and on 5 January
    2015 the Appellant at the  Sponsor's  address  was  notified  that  the
    application for an adjournment had been refused.

15. On 8 January 2015 the Sponsor was not present.   No  message  had  been
    left with the reception desk at Field House and searches of the waiting
    areas at Field House did not disclose the Sponsor or any representative
    for the Appellant.  I was satisfied that due notice of the  time,  date
    and place set for the hearing  had  been  given  to  the  Appellant  in
    accordance with the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  as
    amended and that having regard to the over-riding objective of  Rule  2
    and the issues raised in the grounds for appeal it was just to  proceed
    with the hearing in the absence of the Sponsor  or  any  representative
    for the Appellant.

16. Mr Melvin submitted a skeleton argument for the ECO.  This referred  to
    the restriction imposed from 25 June 2013 by Section 52  of  the  Crime
    and Courts Act 2013 the  right  of  to  appeal  in  cases  where  entry
    clearance for a family visit had been  refused  to  race  relations  or
    human rights grounds.

17. The skeleton argument referred to the judgment in Patel v  SSHD  [2013]
    UKSC 72 in which the Supreme Court noted that Article 8 of the European
    Convention outside the IRs was not a general dispensing ground.

18. The skeleton argument considered the Judge had failed  to  engage  with
    any claim the Appellant might have  had  under  Article  8  within  the
    Immigration Rules and had  not  performed  any  balancing  exercise  in
    relation to the Article 8 claim outside the Rules whether there  was  a
    dependency between Appellant and the Sponsor beyond normal ties between
    parents and adult children and  had  failed  to  perform  any  exercise
    balancing the rights of the Appellant for respect to  her  private  and
    family  life  against  the  public  interest  in   maintaining   proper
    immigration control.  Additionally, the Judge had failed to  take  into
    account the ECO's view of the public  interest  in  the  assessment  of
    claims engaging Article 8 as provided by Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

19. Additionally, the ECO provided evidence of the  cost  of  family  visit
    entry clearance applications and a copy of Standard Note  SN06363  last
    updated 5 July 2013  from  the  House  of  Commons  Library  about  the
    Abolition of Family Visitor Visa Appeal Rights.

20. Mr Melvin relied on his skeleton argument.

Findings and Consideration

21. Having heard evidence from  the  Sponsor,  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant did in fact satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph  41  and
    allowed the appeal against the refusal under paragraph 320(7A)  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  Appellant  did  in  fact  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules for the issue  of
    entry clearance to her as a family visitor.

22. There was no challenge by the ECO to  the  Judge's  findings  that  the
    Appellant did in fact meet the requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules for entry clearance as a family  visitor  or  to  his
    decision to allow  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  under  paragraph
    320(7A) of the IRs (use of deception  etc.).   There  was  no  material
    additional evidence about the relationship of  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor, her son which went to suggest that the nature and  quality  of
    the relationship was anything other  than  that  which  would  normally
    subsist between a parent and an adult child.

23. Parliament has decided that those refused entry clearance for  purposes
    of a family visit because the Entry Clearance Officer at the Visa  Post
    and the Entry Clearance Manager consider the applicant  does  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 41  shall  not  be  entitled  to  seek  a
    judicial determination of the issue by way of appeal  by  reference  to
    the Immigration Rules.  Parliament has decided that the only grounds of
    appeal in such cases shall be race discrimination or Article 8; in this
    case, that the decision  fails  to  respect  the  family  life  of  the
    Appellant and her son protected by Article 8 of the European Convention
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Appellant  has  not  made   any
    allegation of race discrimination.

24. With this in mind, I adopt  the  approach  to  appeals  on  grounds  of
    Article 8 in accordance with jurisprudence which comes from  Strasbourg
    and  from  Huang  v  SSHD  [2007]  UKHL  11  and  subsequent  judgments
    summarised at paragraphs 7-12 of EB (Kosovo) v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  41.
    The Appellant and her son clearly have a family life.  They  pursue  it
    while the son is in the United Kingdom and the Appellant is  in  Ghana.
    They have chosen to pursue their family life in this  manner  for  some
    years.  The refusal of entry clearance to the Appellant  to  visit  her
    son is an interference with her  family  life.   She  has  on  previous
    occasions visited her son and he has visited her.

25. Although the Appellant has been  found  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules I do  not  find  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance in the circumstances of the Appellant and her son is  a
    sufficiently serious interference with her family life as to engage the
    United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 to respect the family life
    of the Appellant and her son.  The son could, as he has  in  the  past,
    visit the Appellant in Ghana.  The  Appellant  could  apply  again  for
    entry clearance and this  time  she  would  have  the  benefit  of  the
    findings of fact made by the Tribunal.  The additional cost  and  delay
    are not matters which are sufficiently serious to  engage  the  state's
    obligations under Article 8.

  26. The consequence is that the appeal must fail on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

27. There was no request for an anonymity lowdown and having considered the
    appeal I find none is warranted.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's determination contained a material error  of  law.
It is set aside insofar only  as  it  relates  to  a  consideration  of  the
Appellant's appeal outside the Immigration Rules  under  Article  8  of  the
European Convention.

The following decision is substituted:-

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed/Official Crest   Date 15. i. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE ECO:  FEE AWARD

The appeal of the Appellant has been  dismissed  so  there  can  be  no  fee
award.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 15. i. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

