
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA / 00331 / 2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12 May 2016                             |On 19 May 2016                 |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi                |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |RA                                                |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |


                               ANONYMITY ORDER


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) and given that this decision mentions involve  minor
    children, I make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
    Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    appellant referred to in this decision as the claimant or  any  of  the
    members of her  family  or  any  of  the  children  mentioned  in  this
    decision.


    This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

Representation:

For  the  Appellant:      Ms  A  Brocklesby-Weller,   Senior   Home   Office
Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms R Akther, of Counsel, instructed by Hudson  Legal.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO")  has  been  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Thanki who allowed the appeal of RA (who I shall refer to
    hereafter as the  "claimant",  to  avoid  confusion)  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8) against the decision of the ECO of 3 December  2014
    to refuse her application for entry  clearance  as  a  visitor  to  the
    United Kingdom for a period of 15 days under para 41 of  the  Statement
    of Changes in the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  (hereafter
    referred to collectively as the "Rules" and individually as a "Rule").

 2. The claimant, a 33-year old national of Syria, had  applied  for  entry
    clearance as a visitor in order to visit the children  of  her  husband
    from his previous marriage. He has a son and a daughter, aged 15  years
    and 13 years respectively, by his previous marriage. They  are  British
    citizens. They live in the United Kingdom with their mother. There is a
    "Residence and Prohibited Steps Order" issued by the  Family  Court  in
    March 2010 which prohibits the claimant's  husband  from  removing  the
    children from England and Wales or from the care  of  their  mother  or
    from their schools without the consent of the Court.

 3. The claimant's husband is a  British  citizen.  The  claimant  and  her
    husband have a 3-year old son who is also a British citizen.  They live
    in Dubai, where the claimant's mother and siblings also live. They have
    the relevant residence permits. The claimant and  her  husband  have  a
    successful business in Dubai.  The  claimant  works  full-time  in  the
    business.

 4. The ECO did not accept that the claimant was a genuine visitor or  that
    she would leave the United Kingdom at the conclusion of her  visit.  He
    therefore concluded that she did not satisfy the requirements  in  para
    41(i) and (ii) of the rules.

 5. The claimant appealed on human rights grounds under s.82(1)(c)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act").

The judge's decision

 6. The judge heard oral evidence from the claimant's husband.

 7. The claimant's husband said, inter alia, that the claimant speaks  with
    his children approximately 3-4 times a month on the telephone and  that
    they also speak to the children  through  Skype.  The  judge  also  had
    witness statements from the claimant and her husband, describing  their
    lives in Dubai. They described the efforts they  make  to  ensure  that
    their son has a close bond with his cousins in Dubai and  their  desire
    to ensure that he has a relationship  with  his  step-siblings  in  the
    United Kingdom, as well as their desire for the claimant  to  meet  the
    husband's children in the United Kingdom.

 8. At paras 18 and 19 of the  decision,  the  judge  summarised  the  oral
    evidence of the  claimant's  husband  about  the  contact  between  the
    claimant and her step-children as follows:

            "18. He confirmed  that  he  had  produced  a  printout  of  his
                 contact with his children in the UK through WhatsApp.  When
                 he was on the telephone to  the  children  in  the  UK  the
                 [claimant] also spoke to the children.  She  spoke  to  the
                 children 3-4 times a month.

            19.  In re-examination he  said  he  also  spoke  to  the  other
                 children through Skype as did the [claimant] but  they  had
                 no record to show today."

 9. The judge reminded himself that  the  burden  of  proof  was  upon  the
    claimant and the standard of proof the  balance  of  probabilities.  He
    reminded himself of the restricted ground of appeal in  s.82(1)(c)  and
    head note 1 of the guidance in Adjei (visit visas - Article  8)  [2015]
    UKUT 0261 (IAC), which reads:


           "1.   The first question to be addressed in  an  appeal  against
                 refusal to grant entry clearance as a  visitor  where  only
                 human rights grounds are available is whether article 8  of
                 the ECHR is engaged at all. If it is not,  which  will  not
                 infrequently be the case, the Tribunal has no  jurisdiction
                 to embark upon an assessment of the  decision  of  the  ECO
                 under the rules and should not  do  so.  If  article  8  is
                 engaged, the Tribunal may need to look  at  the  extent  to
                 which the claimant is said  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
                 requirements of  the  rule  because  that  may  inform  the
                 proportionality  balancing  exercise  that  must   follow1.
                 Mostafa (Article 8 in  entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112
                 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition.
                       Footnote 1: Now see SS (Congo) v Secretary of  State
                 for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 387."

10. The judge found the claimant's husband a credible witness. He made  his
    findings and gave his reasons at paras 30-39. In summary,  he  accepted
    that the claimant's husband visits his children in the United  Kingdom.
    He maintains them financially. They cannot travel to Dubai to visit the
    claimant and their  step-brother.  He  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    claimant's husband that the 3-year old son was  close  to  his  mother,
    that it would be difficult if not impossible for the claimant's husband
    to bring the 3-year old to  the  United  Kingdom  to  visit  his  step-
    siblings without the claimant and that the  claimant  also  desires  to
    meet her step-children.

11. The judge said that he accepted that family life  was  wider  than  the
    immediate nuclear family and found (at para 33) that "... there  exists
    family life from the [claimant's regular telephone  and  Skype  contact
    with the British children in the UK".

12. In relation to proportionality, he  considered  the  application  under
    para 41 of the Rules and found that the claimant was a genuine  visitor
    and that there was no evidence that she would not return  to  Dubai  at
    the end of her visit. His reasons for making these  findings  were,  in
    essence that she is well settled in Dubai with lawful authority  to  do
    so from the evidence of her labour card. She  works  in  her  husband's
    firm and lives with her husband and their 3-year old son. She  receives
    a monthly salary and her own family  from  Syria  is  also  settled  in
    Dubai. He considered that it was natural that she wishes to  visit  her
    husband's children by his previous marriage not only for herself but to
    enhance contact between her son and the  step-children  in  the  United
    Kingdom. He found that the claimant would wish to return to her  normal
    life in Dubai through her employment and family life (including her own
    family).   He  therefore  concluded  that,  "in   the   proportionality
    analysis", the ECO's decision was  not  proportionate  taking  all  the
    circumstances into account (para 38).

The grounds

13. The grounds contend that:

    i)      The judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons  why  family  life
        exists between the claimant and the children of her husband in  the
        United Kingdom or between the her 3-year  old  son  and  his  step-
        siblings in the United Kingdom.

    ii)     The finding that it  would  be  difficult  for  the  claimant's
        husband to travel  to  the  United  Kingdom  without  the  claimant
        because she is required to look after  their  3-year  old  son  was
        "curious" given that he would be travelling with his own father and
        that, in any event, she cannot be looking after the child full-time
        because she works full-time.

    iii)    Given that the claimant's husband visits his  children  in  the
        UK, the ECO's decision does not interfere with his visits to  them.
        In any event, there was no finding that the children  cannot  visit
        them in Dubai accompanied by their mother.

    iv)     Article 8 does not afford the claimant's husband the choice  as
        to the location where the visits should take place or who should be
        permitted to accompany him for the purpose of caring for his child.



    v)      The judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  statutory  public
        interest consideration as required by s.117B of the 2002 Act.

Submissions

14. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the judge had failed to explain why
    family life was enjoyed between the claimant and her  stepchildren.  It
    was unclear from the judge's reasoning  how  the  limited  evidence  of
    contact described at paras 18 and 19 of the decision was sufficient for
    the finding that family life exists. There was no suggestion  that  the
    claimant was involved in their upbringing and  no  evidence  about  the
    substance or the content of the telephone  calls  or  nature  of  their
    contact. There was no explanation about the nature of the  relationship
    and no evidence about the effect on the two children in the UK of being
    separated from the claimant.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  this
    ground was determinative.  However, she did address me briefly  on  the
    remaining grounds.

15. Ms Akther submitted  that  the  presumption  that  family  life  exists
    between a minor child and his  or  her  biological  parent  extends  to
    include the partner/spouse  of  the  biological  parent.   She  had  no
    authority to support this proposition but she  submitted  that  it  was
    common sense.

16. Ms Akther submitted that, in any event, the judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons for his finding that family life exists  between  the  claimant
    and her step-children. The judge had acknowledged that family life  was
    wider than the immediate nuclear family. The  reason  for  the  limited
    evidence of contact by telephone and Skype was that this was  the  only
    means she had of enjoying family life with her stepchildren.

17. In relation to proportionality, Ms Akther submitted that the claimant's
    3-year old son was effectively barred from coming to the United Kingdom
    to visit his step-siblings because he needs to travel with his  mother.
    The judge correctly followed  the  approach  in  Adjei  and  reached  a
    conclusion that was open to him.

18. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

19. I consider first whether the judge erred by failing  to  give  adequate
    reasons for his finding that family life exists  between  the  claimant
    and her step-children.

20. I have no hesitation in rejecting  Ms  Akther's  proposition  that  the
    presumption of family life between biological parents and  their  minor
    children extends to the partners of the biological parents irrespective
    of the circumstances. There is no authority for this proposition. It is
    difficult to see the justification for such a presumption  which  takes
    no account of whether the step-parent has any contact with the children
    or indeed has any interest in them at all.

21. I agree with Ms Akther that the judge correctly reminded  himself  that
    family life can be found to exist in circumstances beyond the immediate
    nuclear family. Whilst at first sight, it does appear that the  contact
    between the claimant and her step-children as evidenced by the  summary
    of the husband's evidence at paras 18 and 19 of  the  judge's  decision
    was insufficient, the judge had detailed witness  statements  from  the
    claimant and her husband describing  their  desire  to  strengthen  the
    relationship between the claimant and her son, on the one hand, and the
    children of the claimant's husband by his  previous  marriage,  on  the
    other hand. Importantly, the claimant states in her  witness  statement
    that she has regular Skype conversations with her step-children in  the
    UK and that she "... is always trying [her] best to  keep  these  bonds
    tight for the children's sake and their future...".

22. I have concluded that, taking into account the evidence in the  witness
    statements, there was (just about) sufficient evidence before the judge
    for him to reach his finding that there was  family  life  between  the
    claimant and her step-children and that,  on  that  evidence,  he  gave
    adequate reasons for his finding at para 33, that "there exists  family
    life from the [claimant's] regular telephone and Skype contact with the
    British children in the UK".

23. There is nothing of any substance  in  the  remainder  of  the  grounds
    summarised at my para 13 above.

24. There was no need for the judge to make a finding that there was family
    life between the claimant's 3-year old and his step-siblings, since  he
    did not need to appeal against a refusal of entry clearance.

25. The argument summarised at my paragraph 13 ii) amounts to no more  than
    an attempt to re-argue the case.

26. In any event, the remaining grounds ignore the  fact  that  the  reason
    advanced for it being necessary for both the claimant and her young son
    to travel to the UK to meet the children  in  the  UK  is  because  her
    husband is prohibited from taking them out of  the  United  Kingdom.  I
    accept that there is nothing  to  show  that  the  mother  of  the  two
    children has been requested to  travel  with  them  to  Dubai  but  the
    claimant did not need to establish her  case  before  the  judge  on  a
    standard of proof higher than the balance of probabilities.

27. The argument summarised at my para 13 v), that the judge failed to have
    regard to the statutory public interest in  s.117B  of  the  2002  Act,
    ignores the fact that the judge found that the claimant  satisfied  the
    requirements of para 41 of the Rules as a visitor, i.e. that she  is  a
    genuine visitor and that she will leave the United Kingdom at  the  end
    of her visit. In those circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  he  took
    adequate account of the public interest. Para  34  shows  that  he  was
    aware that the public interest in question was the  maintenance  of  an
    effective immigration policy. At para 38, he  said  that  he  concluded
    that the respondent's decision was not  proportionate  taking  all  the
    circumstances in to account. It is difficult to see what else he  could
    have said to demonstrate that he had taken full  account  of  all  that
    could be said on the state's side of  the  balancing  exercise  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case, i.e. bearing in  mind  that  the
    appeal concerned an application for entry clearance as a visitor for  a
    period of 15 days and that the judge found  that  the  claimant  was  a
    genuine visitor who would leave the UK at the end of her visit.

      Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error on a point of law. The Entry Clearance  Officer's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.


[pic]


Signed                                             Date: 16 May 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
