
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00673/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2015                            |On 27 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - istanbul
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                mr OZGUR SOBE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Geraldine Peterson, Counsel instructed by Gulsen
                    & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeal on behalf of the  appellant  to  the
    Upper Tribunal from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing
    the claimant's appeal  against  the  decision  by  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer to refuse him entry clearance as a family visitor.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not
    consider that an anonymity direction is warranted for these proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national  of  Turkey,  whose  date  of  birth  is  10
    December 1993.  He applied for entry clearance to visit his  family  in
    the UK for ten days.  His application was refused by an Entry Clearance
    Officer in Istanbul on 7 January 2014.  The reasoning of  the  ECO  was
    that his father had gone to the UK  in  2009  as  a  visitor,  but  had
    remained under the provisions of the ECAA Rules where he had continuing
    leave under that category.  His mother and brother  had  leave  as  his
    dependants.  The claimant had previously applied to join his father  in
    2011 and 2013, but both applications were refused.  The claimant was  a
    student at Izmir University studying physiotherapy and  rehabilitation.
    He registered in September 2012, and was currently in the  second  year
    of his four year degree.  At  the  time  of  his  previous  application
    submitted  in  July  2013  (his  application   for   settlement),   his
    circumstances were the same as now, in that he was also enrolled  on  a
    four  year  university  course.   Nonetheless  he  had  stated  in  his
    application for settlement that his intention was to settle in  the  UK
    with his father.  So he had not given a reason why six months later his
    intention was no longer to settle with his father, but merely to  visit
    him.   It  was  his  responsibility  to  satisfy  the  ECO   that   his
    circumstances in Turkey were such that  if  given  leave  to  enter  he
    complied with all the conditions attached to such leave,  and  that  he
    intended to leave the UK at the end of his visit.  But the claimant had
    not  done  this.   So  he  refused  the  application  by  reference  to
    subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of  paragraph  41  of  the  Rules.   It  was
    pointed out that his  right  of  appeal  was  limited  to  the  grounds
    referred to in Section 84(1)(c) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The claimant's appeal came before  Judge  Buchanan  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross in the First-tier Tribunal on 25 September 2014.  Ms Peterson  of
    Counsel appeared on behalf of the claimant, and  a  Presenting  Officer
    appeared on behalf of the ECO.  The judge received oral  evidence  from
    the claimant's  mother  and  father,  and  also  considered  a  witness
    statement from the claimant.

 4. In his subsequent determination, Judge Buchanan allowed the appeal  for
    the reasons given by him in paragraphs 4.1 to 4.7.  Paragraphs  4.1  to
    4.5 related entirely to the merits of the appeal against  the  decision
    under paragraph 41.  The judge concluded  at  paragraph  4.5  that  the
    claimant had ties both economic and personal to Turkey  from  which  he
    concluded that his stated intention of  only  visiting  the  UK  during
    breaks and study was a genuinely stated intention.

 5. At paragraph 4.6 the judge addressed the question of family  life.   He
    found that the claimant enjoyed family life with his family in the  UK.
    He was part of the family group, the remainder of whom had  settled  in
    the UK.  He considered it was relevant that  the  claimant  would  fall
    within the category of children who might be  admitted  to  the  UK  as
    being unmarried and fully dependent under the  age  of  21  (under  the
    Ankara Agreement).  The judge continued:

         In my judgment, where a decision by  the  respondent  to  refuse  a
         visit visa application may impact on future applications  to  visit
         the UK; and where the remainder of the family are settled in the UK
         then there will be interference in family life.  I do not  consider
         that  that  interference  is  proportionate   notwithstanding   the
         accepted position that the [claimant] would  be  entitled  to  make
         further application to settle in the UK until aged 21.  In reaching
         that conclusion I have regard also to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 6. The judge concluded in paragraph 4.7 that the  claimant  had  satisfied
    him on balance that he intended to leave the  UK  at  the  end  of  any
    visit, and he went on to allow the appeal in respect of the immigration
    decision made by the ECO, without specifying that he was  allowing  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. A member of the Specialist Appeals Team settled  extensive  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, arguing that in order for the claimant to
    be successful on Article 8 grounds, the Tribunal in line  with  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) would  have  to  identify  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised by the Rules.

 8. It was also submitted that  relationships  between  adult  siblings  or
    adult children and their parents would not normally  constitute  family
    life unless there were special elements of  dependency,  beyond  normal
    emotional ties, citing the following passage in Kugathas v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31:

         The family life is not established between an  adult  child  and  a
         surviving parent or other siblings  unless  something  more  exists
         than normal emotional ties.  ...  Such  ties  might  exist  if  the
         appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa.

    They also pointed out that:

         Neither blood ties nor the concern and affection that ordinarily go
         with them are ... enough to constitute family  life.   Most  of  us
         have close relations of whom we are  extremely  fond  and  whom  we
         visit ... from time to time; but none of  us  would  say  on  those
         grounds alone that we share a family life with them  in  any  sense
         capable of coming within the meaning and purpose of Article 8.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 9. On 25 November 2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  G  White  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons.  It was unclear on what
    basis the judge had allowed the appeal.  If it had been  allowed  under
    the Rules, that was arguably an error of law.  If the appeal  had  been
    allowed on human rights grounds, it was arguable that the judge had not
    followed the approach indicated in Gulshan/Nagre (as modified by MM) in
    regard to compelling circumstances.  The judge had also arguably failed
    to give proper regard to the  fact  that  the  claimant  was  an  adult
    (Kugathas).

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. At the hearing before me, Ms Peterson relied on  an  extensive  written
    Rule 24 response  in  defence  of  the  judge's  determination.   After
    hearing submissions from both parties, I ruled that an error of law was
    made out such the decision should be set aside and remade.  I  gave  my
    reasons for so finding in short form, and my extended reasons  are  set
    out below.  I then received submissions from both parties as to how the
    decision should be remade.  On that question, I reserved my decision.



Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

11. In paragraph [21] of Muse & Ors v Entry Clearance Officer  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ  10  Lord  Justice  Toulson  acknowledged  that  the  case  law  at
    Strasbourg and in the UK placed a high value on the ability of families
    to live together: and it was well established that in this regard there
    is both a positive and a negative obligation under Article 8.

12. At paragraph [22] he said that the principle enunciated by Lord Bingham
    in paragraph 20 of Huang [2007] UKHL 11  drew  no  distinction  between
    refusal of leave to enter and refusal of  leave  to  remain.   However,
    that was not to say that, in the  application  of  the  principle,  the
    question of proportionality  between  proper  immigration  control  and
    proper respect for family life need be answered in the same way:

    (a)  in a case of refusal of entry which is sought for the  purpose  of
         family reunion; and

    (b)  in a case of removal which would break up a family.

    Each case has to be considered on its own facts.

13. At paragraph [23], he observed that the trauma of breaking up a  family
    and thereby rupturing family ties may be significantly greater than the
    effect of not facilitating the reunion of a family whose  members  have
    become accustomed to living apart following a decision by part  of  the
    family to live elsewhere.

14. At paragraph [24] he held that where entry is sought for the purpose of
    family  reunion,  the  Immigration  Rules,  laid   before   Parliament,
    represent an attempt by the government to strike a fair balance between
    respect  for  family  life  and  immigration  control,  which  includes
    economic  considerations.   It  is  within  the   state's   margin   of
    appreciation to set those Rules and as a  matter  of  generalities  the
    requirements are proportionate.  But the Rules are  the  beginning  and
    not the end of the matter.  The authorities provide examples  of  cases
    which fall outside the Rules where the positive obligation of the state
    under Article 8 requires the giving of leave to enter.  Such cases  are
    often difficult and require close analysis of the facts.

15. While the judge gave adequate reasons for  allowing  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 41, the claimant had no right of appeal on the merits.   This
    appeal could only  succeed  on  Article  8  grounds,  and  the  judge's
    approach to resolving the Article 8 appeal was  inadequate,  both  with
    regard  to  crucial  findings   of   fact   and   also   in   assessing
    proportionality.

16. There is a substantial body of jurisprudence confirming  the  principle
    that family life is not established for the purposes  of  Article  8(1)
    unless there is a relationship of  dependency  and,  where  adults  are
    concerned, that the ties between them go beyond normal emotional  ties.
    Where  an  applicant  asserts  a  financial,  emotional   or   physical
    dependency on the UK sponsor, this is likely to make it more  difficult
    for  the  applicant  to  demonstrate  that  he  or  she  satisfies  the
    requirements of sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph 41.   However,
    the Rules do not in terms debar applicants who are dependants on  a  UK
    sponsor, and so the  Kugathas  dependency  criteria  are  not  directly
    antithetical to the requirements of paragraph 41.  It is  however  true
    that imposing a requirement of dependency in a family visit  appeal  is
    likely to be an insurmountable obstacle in the vast majority of  cases,
    thus rendering the Article 8  right  a  nugatory  one  for  meritorious
    claimants save insofar as they can rely on favourable findings of  fact
    in the Article 8 appeal to  buttress  a  fresh  application  under  the
    Rules.

17. While it was asserted in the grounds of appeal that the claimant had an
    emotional, as well as financial, dependency on his  father,  the  judge
    made no finding to this effect.

18. In her Rule 24 response Ms Peterson does not rely  on  the  proposition
    that Kugathas dependency was or is demonstrated.  Instead,  she  relies
    now, as she did before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  on  the  alternative
    proposition that  family  life  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  was
    established by  reference  to  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  1973
    Immigration Rules which fall to be applied under the Ankara  Agreement.
    The Rule in question is referred to by the judge. It  is  contained  in
    paragraph 42 of HC 509, which states as follows:

         Generally, children aged 18 or over must qualify for  admission  in
         their own right; but subject to the requirements of  paragraphs  37
         and 38, an unmarried  and  fully  dependent  son  under  21  or  an
         unmarried daughter under 21  who  form  part  of  the  family  unit
         overseas may be admitted if the whole family  are  settled  in  the
         United Kingdom or are being admitted for settlement.

19. On the basis of this Rule, Ms Peterson submits the judge was  right  to
    treat the claimant as still being part of the  family  unit,  and  that
    therefore Article 8(1) was engaged, notwithstanding the fact  that  the
    Kugathas criteria were not met.

20. But the critical distinction is that the claimant was not applying  for
    settlement under the Ankara Agreement and hence under  the  Immigration
    Rules as they stood in 1973, but was applying for a  visit  visa  under
    the Rules as they stood in 2010.   In  determining  whether  there  was
    family life for the purposes of Article 8(1) the judge  had  to  direct
    himself by reference to the relevant human  rights  jurisprudence,  and
    not base his finding on a Rule which did not apply to the  application.
    Moreover, as was affirmed by the Supreme Court in Patel, the Article  8
    assessment does not change according to the precise ambit or wording of
    the applicable Immigration Rule that the applicant either fails to meet
    or cannot successfully invoke.  In  short,  the  fact  that  under  the
    Ankara Agreement the claimant can claim a  right  of  settlement  as  a
    financially dependent son under the age of 21  in  circumstances  where
    the remainder of his immediate family are settled in the UK,  does  not
    mean that he has continuing family life with his family in the  UK  for
    the purposes of Article 8(1).

The Remaking of the Decision

21. For the purposes of remaking the decision, I have  taken  into  account
    the contents of the claimant's bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    I see no reason to depart from the favourable findings of fact made  by
    the FTT judge on the claimant's compliance with sub-paragraphs (i)  and
    (ii) of paragraph 41 of the Rules, and those findings  of  fact  remain
    undisturbed.

22. With regard to the Article 8 claim, I refer to  the  five-point  Razgar
    test.  Having carefully  considered  the  evidence  and  Ms  Peterson's
    submissions in her skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal and
    in her Rule 24 response, I find that the Article 8 claim falls  at  the
    first hurdle.   The  claimant  has  not  shown  that  the  interference
    consequential upon the refusal decision is of sufficient  gravity  such
    that questions one and two of the Razgar test should be answered in the
    his favour.  Not only  does  he  not  assert  that  he  is  emotionally
    dependent on his parents in the UK, but he also gives evidence that  he
    is in a long-term relationship with a  student  who  attends  the  same
    university, and that they are cohabiting.  In an undated  letter  which
    was translated on 11 October 2014 his girlfriend says  that  they  have
    been living together at the same address for around a year, which means
    that they were living together at the date of the refusal decision.  So
    although the claimant remained financially dependent on his  father  at
    the date of decision, he was otherwise leading an independent life  and
    had formed a family unit with his girlfriend.

23. By the date of the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there  was  a
    practical impediment to family members in the UK  returning  to  Turkey
    for a  family  visit.   This  was  because  they  had  submitted  their
    passports to the Home Office for the purposes  of  an  application  for
    ILR.  But this practical impediment did not exist at the  date  of  the
    refusal decision, so the effect of the refusal was not to  prevent  the
    claimant seeing his parents and younger brother in Turkey.

24. Since I answer questions one and two of the  Razgar  test  against  the
    claimant, it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  consider  the  remaining
    questions.  But, for the avoidance of doubt, I answer  questions  three
    and four of the Razgar test in the ECO's favour.  Although the claimant
    successfully established in his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  that
    he was a genuine visitor, I am not persuaded that the  concerns  raised
    by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  at  the  date  of   decision   were
    unreasonable on the evidence that was made available to  him.   By  the
    same token, I find that the refusal decision was proportionate,  having
    regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  It was also proportionate  for
    another reason, which was that the interference was temporary.  It  was
    and remains open to the claimant to make  a  fresh  application  for  a
    visit visa, relying on additional evidence and/or  favourable  judicial
    findings to show that the requirements of sub-paragraphs (i)  and  (ii)
    of paragraph 41 are met.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted:

This appeal on Article 8 grounds against the refusal of entry  clearance  as
a visitor is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 27 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

