

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/00285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 1st December 2014                         |On: 3rd February 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Domnic Antony Fernandes
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Otchie, Malik Law Chambers Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of India  date  of  birth  30th  October
       1970.  On the 8th September 2014 the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  YJ
       Jones) allowed his appeal against a decision to refuse to  grant  him
       entry clearance as a family visitor to the UK.  The  Entry  Clearance
       Officer now has permission[1] to appeal against that decision.


    2. It is not  in  dispute  that  the  Respondent's  appeal  rights  were
       limited. That is because his appeal was brought after the  25th  June
       2013 when s52 of the Crime and Courts  Act  2013  came  into  effect,
       amending s88A of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The
       effect of those changes is that appeals against a refusal of a  visit
       visa can now only be brought on two grounds: race discrimination  and
       human rights.  It was the latter avenue that the Respondent pursued.


    3. As the facts set out by the determination illustrate, this was not an
       average visit visa  application.  That  was  because  the  Respondent
       wishes to come to the UK in  order  to  visit  his  wife,  a  British
       citizen who lives and works here.  The First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
       that the two had entered into marriage on the understanding that  for
       the immediate future at least, she would continue to reside and  work
       in the UK and he would continue to reside and work in  the  UAE.   He
       has  been  there  for  over  twenty  years.   They   maintain   their
       relationship by regular visits: they speak by phone etc and see  each
       other every 2-3 months.


    4. Judge YJ Jones found the Sponsor to be an entirely credible  witness.
       Taking her evidence in the round with the documentary evidence before
       him he was satisfied that the Respondent has been living and  working
       in the UAE for over twenty years. He has  extended  family  there  as
       well as in India. The Sponsor has been visiting him every 2-3 months.
        This marriage was agreed on that  basis.  There  was  an  Article  8
       family  life.    Judge  Jones  was  satisfied  that   this   decision
       interfered with it and the consequences were of such  gravity  as  to
       engage the Article.  He then went on,  to  analyse  the  reasons  for
       refusal. He found no reason to suspect that the Respondent was not  a
       genuine visitor who intends to leave the UK at the end of  his  trip.
       On the evidence before Judge Jones, the requirements of paragraph  41
       were  all  met.   He  went  on  to  find  the   refusal   to   be   a
       disproportionate  interference  with  the  Respondent  and  Sponsor's
       family life and allowed the appeal.


    5. The Entry Clearance Officer now appeals on the grounds that the First-
       tier  Tribunal  failed  to  identify  whether  there  are  compelling
       circumstances not recognised by the Rules: Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640
       (IAC), Nagre [2013] EWHC 720.  Since the decision failed to  identify
       what  in  the  circumstances  were  compelling  or  exceptional,  the
       decision could not stand.


       No Error of Law


    6. Permission was granted in this appeal  before  the  decision  of  the
       Court of Appeal in R (MM & Others) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  was
       handed down. As that decision makes clear there is  no  'gateway'  or
       intermediate threshold that needs to be crossed before Article 8  can
       be considered.  There  is  no  "exceptionality"  test:   see  also  R
       (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin), R (on the  application
       of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539
       (IAC).  All Gulshan, Nagre and Shahzad underline  is  that  where  an
       applicant cannot meet the requirements of  the  relevant  immigration
       rule the consideration of proportionality will involve looking to see
       whether there are any particular factors pertaining to that applicant
       that are not  reflected  in  the  Rules.  In  this  case  it  is  the
       unchallenged finding  of  fact  that  the  applicant  does  meet  the
       requirements of the relevant rule so none of these  authorities  have
       any application. He is  a  genuine  visitor  who  meets  all  of  the
       requirements of paragraph 41. The reason that Article 8 is engaged in
       this very unusual case is because he and his wife's marriage is,  for
       the moment at least, based upon  visits.  If  he  is  prevented  from
       coming to the  UK  to  see  her  that  will  be  a  very  substantial
       interference with their family  life  together  since  face  to  face
       contact will then be limited to the times that she manages to get  to
       the UAE.   This was a decision open to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence
       before him and it contains no error of law.


    7. I would add that the grant of permission mentions ss117A and 117B  of
       the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The public interest
       considerations set out therein are concerned with the  extent  of  an
       applicant's integration into the UK in  the  context  of  considering
       whether he should have to leave it. Since  this  applicant  does  not
       claim to be integrated, nor does he express any desire to become  so,
       it is doubtful that express recognition  of  these  principles  would
       have made any difference at all  to  this  decision.  The  Respondent
       wishes to come to visit the UK for 11  days.    If  Judge  Jones  had
       fulfilled the statutory obligation to have regard  to  these  factors
       the decision would have been exactly the same.  If he recognized that
       the maintenance of immigration control is in the public  interest  he
       would  have  pointed  out  that  the  Respondent  meets  all  of  the
       requirements of paragraph 41 of the Rules etc.


       Decision


    8. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  an
       error of law and it is upheld.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           28th January 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on the 27th October 2014

