

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/00416/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th April 2015                            |On 22nd May 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR JOSEPH ASIDEU AMOAH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Practitioners LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. Although the appellant is the Secretary of State we  will  refer  to
       the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born  on  14th  April  1991.  He
       applied to come to the UK as a family visitor to see his father  who
       is a British citizen living in the UK. His application  was  refused
       on 12th December 2013. His appeal against  the  decision  to  refuse
       entry clearance was allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Lingam in a determination  promulgated  on  the  29th
       December 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in  allowing  the  appeal
       under Article 8 ECEHR given the appellant was an adult, and  because
       it was arguable that an inadequate assessment of proportionality had
       been carried out which resulted in Article 8 being used as a general
       dispensing power.

    4. The matter came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    5.  Mr  Deller  relied  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  made  oral
       submissions. He accepted that there were no  credibility  issues  in
       the appeal as the sponsor was found to be a credible witness.

    6. Mr Deller amplified firstly the contention that Judge  Lingam  erred
       by treating the appellant as having  family  life  with  his  father
       given that he was an adult. It was argued that the law in Kugathas v
       SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 had not been properly applied. There were no
       proper reasons for the  finding  that  the  appellant  had  a  close
       relationship with his father as set  out  at  paragraph  25  of  the
       decision. Mr Deller accepted  that  at  the  time  of  decision  the
       appellant had not in fact been earning any money as he was a student
       who was financially  support  by  his  father.  (Subsequent  to  the
       decision he had earned  a  small  allowance  whilst  doing  national
       service but this was of no relevance.) If the appellant  and  father
       had a close relationship it was perhaps questionable why the  father
       had not visited him more often. However he conceded that  ultimately
       it was potentially open to Judge  Lingam  to  find  that  there  was
       family life given the issues of the mother's behaviour in taking the
       appellant away from his father as a child and then abandoning him on
       her remarriage in Ghana.

    7. Further, Mr Deller did not pursue a separate ground, which was  that
       even if there was a family life relationship the decision to  refuse
       entry clearance did not interfere with the existing pattern of  that
       relationship, as he accepted it was important to be able to  develop
       any family life which did exist. Ultimately Mr Deller accepted  that
       it was legally open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  find  that
       the refusal of entry clearance did amount to  an  interference  with
       any family life which was found to exist.

    8. Mr Deller argued that the proportionality assessment at paragraph 27
       of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was not  adequate  as  it
       was not clear why the father could not visit the appellant in  Ghana
       or elsewhere given he had 28 days of annual leave  and  a  good  job
       with the Ghana High Commission. There was no adequate exploration as
       to  why  alternative  ways  of  having  family  life  together  were
       unsatisfactory. The overall affect was to use Article 8  ECHR  as  a
       general dispensing power.

    9. Mr Deller accepted that the decision of Judge Lingam was  consistent
       with the approach taken by the Upper Tribunal in Mostafa (Article  8
       in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112. There were clear findings  that
       the appellant could meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
       disputed in the original refusal notice, and in the light of Mostafa
       this was rightly  given  weight  in  the  proportionality  balancing
       exercise.

   10. Mr Deller ultimately did not argue that the reference to s.117B  (4)
       &(5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  created  any
       arguments that an error of law had been committed.

   11. Mr Kannangaran submitted that Judge Lingam  had  made  a  clear  and
       detailed decision which disclosed no errors of law.

   12. Mr Kannangaran submitted that Judge  Lingam  had  properly  directed
       herself on the law regarding adult children and family life, and had
       cited Kugathas  in  her  findings.  She  had  looked  at  issues  of
       emotional  ties  and  financial  dependency.  The  extent   of   the
       appellant's work was clear to Judge Lingam. Judge Lingam  had  noted
       the fact that the  appellant's  father  also  provided  guidance  on
       studies and career. She had started from  the  position,  which  was
       clearly correct on the facts of the case as set out to her, that the
       appellant did not have family life in Ghana: although he lived  with
       his paternal uncle there was no evidence of family  life  ties  with
       this gentleman. The use of the word "probably" at paragraph  25  was
       of no relevance as Judge Lingam had clearly concluded the  appellant
       and his father had family life.  The  conclusions  she  came  to  at
       paragraphs 17 and 25 of her decision were properly open to her.

   13. Mr Kannangaran submitted that proportionality had also been properly
       considered, particularly in the  light  of  the  approach  taken  in
       Mostafa. He noted that the appellant had  applied  for  a  one  year
       multiple entry visa, and that he had said on his application form he
       wished to come for a visit of at least four weeks. Further when  the
       letter from the appellant's college was examined  he  did  not  have
       exams until March 2014 so could have stayed for  three  months.  The
       appellant's father was a diplomat with a responsible job  and  could
       not make equivalent visits to Ghana. This was  a  finding  that  was
       open to the First-tier Tribunal on the facts of this  case.  It  was
       also reasonable for the appellant to want to see the place where his
       father lived in the UK and to experience his life in this country.

   14. Neither Mr Deller nor Mr Kannangaran felt the use of the word "best"
       in the final sentence of paragraph 27  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       decision meant that Judge Lingam had departed from a proper approach
       to proportionality.

Conclusions

   15. Mr Deller conceded that it was ultimately  open  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to have found family life between  the  appellant  and  his
       father on the particular facts of this  case  and  that  refusal  of
       entry clearance showed insufficient respect for that family life. We
       are satisfied that this was the case  too.  At  paragraph  15  Judge
       Lingam sets out a detailed description of  the  development  of  the
       relationship between the appellant and his father in the UK, and the
       difficult and traumatic behaviour of the appellant's mother and  how
       this had enhanced the relationship between  the  appellant  and  his
       father. She looks at financial support and emotional  closeness  and
       the provision of guidance. She clearly applies the test in  Kugathas
       at paragraph 26.  Although over  21  years  old  the  appellant  was
       still, at the date of decision, a student dependent  on  his  father
       emotionally and financially.

   16. It is also clear that the appellant and his father wish to move  the
       relationship on from telephone contact to one involving greater face
       to face contact: see paragraphs 15, 25 and 26 of the decision of the
       First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was  therefore  open  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to find that the refusal of entry clearance  did  interfere
       with this family life. Further issues of whether such development of
       the relationship  necessitated  a  grant  of  entry  clearance  were
       properly dealt with under the consideration of  the  proportionality
       of the interference with family life represented by the  refusal  of
       entry clearance.

   17. Mr Deller conceded that weight  must  be  given  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's findings  at  paragraph  27  of  the  decision  that  the
       appellant could in fact meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
       Rules put in dispute in the entry clearance refusal  notice  in  the
       light  of  Mostafa,  and  that  Judge  Lingam  had  therefore  acted
       appropriately in doing this in her examination  of  proportionality.
       Judge Lingam also gave proper weight to her finding that due to  the
       sponsor's heavy work commitments he is only able to  spend  a  short
       periods with his son in Ghana.  In  his  evidence  the  sponsor  had
       explained that he had 28 days of annual leave but also that  he  was
       unable to go to Ghana due to financial  constraints  and  employment
       obligations, see paragraph 10 of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. We find it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to conclude
       that there were not alternative ways  in  which  the  appellant  and
       sponsor could reasonably be expected to take proper  opportunity  to
       enjoy time together in the context of a family visit in the light of
       this evidence, which was accepted as credible. The consideration  of
       proportionality was therefore conducted lawfully.

   18. We therefore conclude that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       did not disclose any errors of law.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.



Signed:                                            Date:  18th May 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







