
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00858/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th August 2016                           |On 22nd August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            svetlana pustavoytova
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Pinder of Counsel instructed by Barar &
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Bartlett made following a hearing at Taylor House on  4th  April  2016.
    The claimant had appealed against a decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, Istanbul, dated 5th January 2015, refusing her application for
    entry clearance for a visit visa.





Background

 2. The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor, the claimant's only son
    who was studying in the UK and wished his mother to visit him here.  At
    that time he was due to  finish  his  Bachelor  of  Science  course  in
    Business and Law at Anglia Ruskin University  in  May  2016.   She  had
    financed his education in the UK and he was dependent financially  upon
    her.  The sponsor had travelled back to see his family in Uzbekistan in
    August 2014 and twice in 2015, trips paid for by the claimant,  and  he
    now wished her to visit him here.

 3. The judge correctly addressed himself as to  the  jurisdiction  of  the
    Tribunal which is limited to  considering  whether  there  has  been  a
    breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.  He  accepted  that  the  sponsor  was
    financially dependent on the claimant and that they enjoyed family life
    together.  The sponsor was an adult but had not gone on to form his own
    family unit and was very  close  to  his  mother.   He  said  that  the
    claimant simply wished to visit her son for a limited period  of  time.
    The respondent's decision was not proportionate and on  that  basis  he
    allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had failed to adequately  explain  why  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision interfered with the family life of mother  and  son.
    The sponsor was a student who was  here  in  the  UK  for  a  temporary
    purpose and the judge had not explained why  the  refusal  of  a  visa,
    which only allowed the  parties  to  be  together  temporarily,  was  a
    disproportionate interference with their Article 8 rights.

 5. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  for  the
    reasons stated in the grounds on 20th July 2016.

The hearing

 6. Mr Walker relied on his grounds.

 7. Ms Pinder relied on her Rule 24 reply and skeleton argument.  She  said
    that the Secretary of State was making a reasons  challenge  which  did
    not meet the test set out in R (Iran) & Others [2005] ECA Civ 982.  The
    reasons given by the judge were legally sufficient.   He  had  properly
    applied the law and reached a decision  which  was  open  to  him.  The
    decision that the claimant met the requirements of paragraph 41  was  a
    starting point for the consideration of whether there was a  breach  of
    Article 8.

 8. I am afraid that I do  not  agree  with  Ms  Pinder.   In  Kaur  (visit
    appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 the Upper  Tribunal  held,  inter
    alia, that:

         "Unless an appellant can show that there are  individual  interests
         at stake covered by Article 8 of a particularly pressing nature  so
         as to give rise to a strong claim that compelling circumstances may
         exist to justify the grant of leave to  enter  outside  the  Rules:
         (see SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [40] and [56]) he  or  she  is
         exceedingly unlikely to succeed.  That proposition must  also  hold
         good in visitor appeals."

 9. It is very hard to see what the individual  interests  at  stake  of  a
    particularly pressing nature are in this case.  The sponsor is here  as
    a student for a temporary purpose.  He has no right to  settle  in  the
    UK.  He has been able to visit his mother  during  university  holidays
    and the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer does not interfere with
    the previous pattern of visits.  The sponsor is free to  pursue  family
    life with his mother in Uzbekistan.

10. I agree with the Entry Clearance Officer  that  the  claimant  has  not
    demonstrated that the  interference  with  her  right  to  family  life
    resulting from the refusal gives rise to such grave  consequences  such
    as to engage Article 8. The judge, in  finding  otherwise,  reached  an
    irrational decision.

Notice of Decision

11. The Secretary of State's challenge to  this  decision  succeeds.    The
    decision of the judge is set aside.  The claimant's appeal against  the
    decision to refuse her entry clearance is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 20 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
