
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00714/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 June 2016                               |On 4 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS MUSSARAT JABEEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell - Home office presenting officer
For the Respondent:    No legal representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State in this matter is  the  appellant  and  I  shall
    refer to the parties as "the Secretary of State" and to  the  appellant
    from the First-tier Tribunal proceedings as  the  "Claimant".   At  the
    hearing before me the sponsor, Mr Khawaja Mushtaq appeared on behalf of
    the appellant who is his mother.  He produced a skeleton  argument,  an
    article and an unreported Tribunal decision.

2.   The Secretary of State appeals the decision and reasons of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Widdup) (FtT) who allowed the claimant's appeal on
    human rights grounds against a decision to refuse her visit visa  under
    the Immigration Rules at paragraph 41 of HC 395 (as amended).

3.   The claimant is a citizen of  Pakistan  and  had  made  regular  family
    visits to the UK in 2005, 2008 and 2011.

4.   The grounds of appeal were restricted under Section  84(1)(b)  and  (c)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The FtT  took  as
    its starting point the issue as to whether or not the claimant met  the
    requirements of paragraph 41.  The FtT followed the approach in Mostafa
    (Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).  At [23] to  [34]  the  FtT  found
    that the claimant  met the requirements under paragraph 41.

5.   At [35] the FtT considered Article 8  and  correctly  cited  the  five-
    stage process in Razgar to be followed.  At [37] the FtT cited Singh  &
    anor v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630 in concluding that it was not necessary
    to consider whether the claimant had a degree of family life  with  her
    family in the UK or whether the relationship formed part of her private
    life.  The FtT further acknowledged that the claimant lived apart  from
    the UK and has her own family life in Pakistan with her husband.

6.   In considering the second question in Razgar the FtT found  that  there
    was an interference of sufficient gravity because the  claimant  had  a
    history of  past  visits  and  a  commitment  to  maintaining  a  close
    relationship with her son, daughter-in-law and grandchildren.  It  then
    found that the decision was lawful.

7.   At [40] the FtT considered proportionality and had  in  mind  that  the
    claimant would be able to make a fresh visit visa  application  on  its
    merits and that the FtT's findings of fact in relation to  meeting  the
    requirements under paragraph 41 could be  taken  into  account  in  any
    future application in the event that family circumstances remained much
    as they were.  The FtT considered timing was relevant  as  in  allowing
    the  appeal  the  visit  would  take  place  sooner  than  if  a  fresh
    application were made and further costs  would  be  avoided.   The  FtT
    found at [42] that the decision did not interfere with  the  claimant's
    family or private life save that it prevented a family visit. It  found
    that in other respects the appellant's relationship with her UK  family
    would continue.  The FtT went on  to  consider  financial  factors  and
    accepted that the cost of a visit by the UK family to Pakistan would be
    expensive and difficult rather than if the claimant visited the  family
    in the UK where it would be cheaper and less disruptive.

8.   The FtT disregarded the refusal letter with reference to  the  lack  of
    insurmountable obstacles to visits in Pakistan on the basis  that  this
    was not the correct approach and that  it  was  "setting  the  bar  too
    high".   The  FtT  posed  the  question  "whether,   given   that   the
    appellant/claimant intends a genuine visit to  her  UK  family,  is  it
    proportionate to prevent her doing so ?"  On the facts as found the FtT
    concluded that the interference was disproportionate  and  allowed  the
    appeal.

Grounds of Application for Permission


9.   Family life must exist in order for Article 8 to be engaged.   The  FtT
    erred in finding family life at [26] and  failing  to  have  regard  to
    Kugathas v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 31 and MS  (Article  8  -  family  life
    dependency - proportionality) Uganda [2004] UKIAT 0064 and Ghising  and
    Others [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).

10.  The FtT erred at [42] by concluding  that  there  was  no  interference
    with the claimant's family and private life save for the fact that  she
    could not visit.

11.  The proportionality assessment was inadequate as it failed  to  explain
    why the refusal of a visa  was  a  disproportionate  interference  with
    Article 8 rights.  The sponsor and his family could visit the  claimant
    in Pakistan.  Reliance was placed on  paragraph  [42]  of  Kaur  (Visit
    appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC) which states that "in order
    to succeed in a claim  outside  the  Rules,  a  claimant  must  show  a
    particularly  pressing  need  so  as  to  give   rise   to   compelling
    circumstances justifying a departure from the Rules".  The  FtT  failed
    to follow such an approach and erred in law.

Permission to Appeal

12.  Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on  17  May
    2016 in the following terms:

         "The appellant wished to visit her adult son and  grandchildren  in
         the UK.  The grounds argue a failure to engage with established law
         as to family life between adults.  They are, in view of the absence
         of any discussion of this in the  decision,  arguable.   The  judge
         appears to refer at paragraph 37 to Singh [2015] EWCA  Civ  630  as
         authority for the proposition that  'I  do  not  need  to  consider
         whether the appellant has some  degree  of  family  life  with  her
         family in the UK', although the CA in that case said only there was
         no legal or factual presumption as to the existence or  absence  of
         family life under Article 8 in the case of adult children.

         There is therefore an  arguable  error  of  law  disclosed  by  the
         application."

Error of Law Hearing and Submissions

13.  Mr  Whitwell  read  the  skeleton  argument  produced  by  the  sponsor
    together with an article from the  Tribune  dated  17  June  2016.   He
    submitted that the FtT could not rely on an  unreported  judgment  that
    had been provided by the sponsor unless the Presidential  guidance  was
    met.

14.  In essence Mr Whitwell submitted that the FtT erred by dispensing  with
    making any findings re family life as  between  the  claimant  and  her
    family in the UK and by relying on Singh which was  not  authority  for
    the proposition that such findings could be dispensed with.

15.  Secondly, the grounds challenged the proportionality  assessment  which
    centred on the timing  and  cost  of  the  visit  which  arguably  were
    insufficient to render a decision disproportionate.

16.  Mr Mushtaq relied on his skeleton  argument.   He  produced  the  birth
    certificates for his two children. There was no  challenge  as  to  the
    family members in the UK and to the fact that the  visits  included  to
    the grandchildren.

17.  The sponsor submitted that the claimant had been a frequent visitor  to
    the UK and that the children had been denied a  continuation  of  their
    relationship with their grandmother.  This was her fourth  application.
    Family life was not in  issue  because  there  was  a  relationship  as
    between the claimant and the sponsor as mother and son and  as  between
    the grandchildren and the claimant.  The FtT  dealt  with  all  of  the
    issues under Article  8  and  further  found  that  she  met  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 41.

18.  Mr Mushtaq submitted that whilst it was possible to take the family  to
    another country for a visit and have a holiday, what  they  wished  for
    was to have the claimant sharing family life with them in  the  UK  for
    the period of her visit. It would be inconvenient and costly for visits
    to take place elsewhere or  in  Pakistan.   Further  the  claimant  had
    recently remarried and it would be difficult for  the  family  to  stay
    with her new husband.  The cases were fact-sensitive and he  relied  on
    the fact that his children were young and had been caused  considerable
    emotional upset by not  being  able  to  see  their  grandmother.   The
    sponsor was the only son in the family and  had  a  close  relationship
    with his mother.  The sponsor  further  raised  the  issue  of  medical
    difficulties suffered by  one  of  his  children  who  had  a  muscular
    condition which made it difficult for him to travel.

19.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now  give
    with my reasons.

Discussion and Decision

20.  The challenge to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  focuses  on  two
    issues in relation to the engagement of  Article  8.  The  first  being
    whether or not  family/private right was engaged under  Article  8  and
    the  second  whether   the  assessment  made   by   the   FtT   as   to
    proportionality was correct.

21.   Mostafa  found that:

         "It will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person  other
         than a close relative will be able to  show  that  the  refusal  of
         entry clearance  comes  within  the  scope  of  Article  8(1).   In
         practical terms this is likely to be limited  to  cases  where  the
         relationship is that of  husband  and  wife  or  other  close  life
         partners or a parent and a minor child ...".


    The Upper Tribunal further held that  in  appeals  against  refusal  of
    entry clearance under Article 8, the claimant's ability to satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal,
    but is capable of being a weighty, though not  a  determinative  factor
    when deciding whether such refusal is proportionate to  the  legitimate
    aim of enforcing immigration control.  The Tribunal took the view  that
    if the claimant has shown that in refusing entry clearance there is  an
    interference with family life then it will be necessary to  assess  the
    evidence to see if the claimant meets the substance of the Rules.  This
    is because the  ability  to  satisfy  the  Rules  will  illuminate  the
    proportionality  of  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance.   The
    approach therefore proposed by Mostafa was for the  Tribunal  to  first
    consider whether or not Article 8(1) was engaged and in the event  that
    it is, thereafter to consider the requirements  of  the  Rules  in  the
    proportionality assessment.  This approach was followed in Adjei (Visit
    visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC).  The Tribunal  there  stated
    that the first question to be addressed was whether or  not  Article  8
    was engaged at all.  "If it is not, which will not infrequently be  the
    case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to embark on  an  assessment  of
    the decision of the ECO under the Rules and should not do so".   Abbasi
    and Another (Visits - bereavement - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463  (IAC)
    held that the refusal of a visa preventing family members attending for
    the  purposes  of  mourning  of  a  close  relative  was   capable   of
    constituting a disproportionate interference with the right of  persons
    concerned under Article 8.  It  further  found  that  the  question  of
    whether Article 8 applied and was breached depended on a fact-sensitive
    context of the particular case and a Tribunal should adopt a structured
    and sequential approach to the Article 8 issues.

22.  More recently  Kaur (Visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487   held
    that in visit appeals the Article 8 decision cannot be made in a vacuum
    and that the starting point must be the state of the evidence as to the
    claimant's ability to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This is  not  inconsistent  with  the  approach  in
    Mostafa  or  Adjei  as  the  Tribunal   emphasised   that   unless   an
    appellant/claimant can show that there individual  interests  at  stake
    covered by Article 8 "of a particularly pressing nature" so as to  give
    rise to a "strong claim that  compelling  circumstances  may  exist  to
    justify the grant of leave to enter outside of the Rules"  then  she/he
    is exceedingly unlikely to succeed.  Reliance was placed on SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

23.  In this appeal there is no challenge to the fact  that  the  FtT  found
    that the claimant met the requirements of the visit  visa  Rules  under
    paragraph 41.  Such matters were correctly taken into  account  by  the
    FtT in its proportionality assessment.

24.  Where the FtT erred is with regard to the failure to make  any  finding
    of fact with respect to the first question in the Razgar stages, namely
    is there an interference with the right  to  respect  for  the  private
    and/or family life of the appellant under Article 8(1) ?  At  [37]  the
    Tribunal cited Singh and took the view that there was no  necessity  to
    consider whether the claimant had a degree of family  or  private  life
    and further went on to acknowledge that the claimant lived  apart  from
    her UK family and had her own family life in Pakistan with her husband.
     I am satisfied that this approach amounts to a material error of  law.
    The FtT failed to consider the nature and extent  of  the  family  life
    and/or private life as between the claimant and her UK family.   It  is
    not simply a  question  of  their  being  a  familial  relationship  in
    existence. In dealing with   adults there must be other factors to show
    a dependency above and beyond the normal family  ties.   There  was  no
    evidence before the FtT to indicate that there was a dependence  beyond
    the normal ties as between the claimant and her only  son  the  sponsor
    and with her young grandchildren.  Further it was acknowledged  by  the
    FtT that the claimant indeed had her own family life in  Pakistan  with
    her husband.  All of the cases referred to above make it clear that  in
    appeals concerning visit visas the first question will  be  whether  or
    not Article 8(1) is engaged.  As stated in Adjei it is  envisaged  that
    it is necessary to show there are individual interests at stake covered
    by Article 8 of a particularly pressing nature so as to give rise to  a
    strong claim that compelling circumstances may  exist  to  justify  the
    grant of leave outside of the Rules.

25.  Accordingly I find that the Tribunal materially erred in law.

26.  Furthermore I find that there was a misdirection of  law  by  the  FtT.
    In Singh and Another [24 ] it was held as follows:

         "I do not think that the judgements to which I have  referred  lead
         to any difficulty in determining the correct approach to Article  8
         in cases involving adult children.  In the case of adults,  in  the
         context of immigration controls,  there  is  no  legal  or  factual
         presumption as to the existence or absence of family life  for  the
         purposes of Article 8.  ... it all depends on the facts.  The  love
         and affection between an adult and his parents or siblings will not
         of itself justify a finding  of  family  life.   There  has  to  be
         something more."


    The reference to Singh  by the First-tier Tribunal [37] was  taken  out
    of context.  In  AA v  UK  [2012]  INLR  it  was  stated  that  in  the
    assessment of proportionality it mattered not whether there was private
    or family life engaged.  On the facts  of  this  case,  which  are  not
    disputed, I find no evidence to establish that family life  is  engaged
    as between the claimant and her adult  son  and/or  the  grandchildren.
    The FtT failed to make findings as to family  and/or  private  life  at
    all.  Accordingly it  was  wrong to continue with the Razgar stages.

27.  Equally, I  am  satisfied  that  the  ground  in  connection  with  the
    assessment of proportionality is also made out.   Whilst  cost,  timing
    and convenience are all factors that in practice impact on the  ability
    of family members to maintain visits and strengthen family ties, on the
    facts of this case visits could be made to the  claimant  in  Pakistan,
    there were other means of maintaining links as between  family  members
    and further the claimant could make a fresh application.  Following  SS
    (Congo) where consideration is made outside of the Rules this  must  be
    justified  by   the   existence   of   compelling   and   compassionate
    circumstances which illuminate the proportionality assessment.   Whilst
    in no way seeking to diminish the importance of maintaining family ties
    and visits  as  between  adult  children  and  grandchildren,  and  the
    frustration experienced by persons making applications for visit  visas
    that are dealt with inconsistently, in this instance the FtT  erred  in
    law as there were no circumstances capable of meeting SS(Congo).

28.  As indicated in the FtT decision and reasons the claimant  may  make  a
    fresh application for her visit visa and with that application submit a
    copy of the First-tier Tribunal decision setting out its  findings  and
    decision that the requirements under paragraph 41  were  met.  Arguably
    the decision should be taken into account in any future application  in
    the event that the family's circumstances remain static.

29.  The only remaining matter is the issue of the sponsor's  son's  medical
    condition.  As explained to the sponsor at the hearing this was  not  a
    matter that was put in evidence before the FtT and/or supported by  any
    medical evidence and it cannot therefore be a matter  of  relevance  to
    this appeal.

Decision

30.  I find a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision  and
    that decision is set aside.

31.  I now go on to remake  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by
    substituting a decision to dismiss the appeal on human rights  grounds.
    There is no evidence before the Tribunal to show that Article  8(1)  is
    engaged.  I base my decision on the facts as found  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which were not disputed and I had in mind the submissions made
    in  the  skeleton  argument   produced   by   the   sponsor   and   his
    representations at the hearing.

32.    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 1.7.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 1.7.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
