
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00418/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th June 2015                    |On 19th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                           miss shouq al shammari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq (living in Jordan) who  applied  for
    entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  family  visitor.   Her
    application was refused but her appeal  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blandy  was  successful  and  he  allowed  her  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 9th January 2015.

 2. The grounds of application make the point that it  is  established  law
    that family life, within the meaning of Article 8,  will  not  normally
    exist between adult siblings, parents and adult children.  Reference is
    made to well-known case law.  It is said that the Appellant is an Iraqi
    refugee living in Jordan and has been visited by her family  there  and
    the refusal of entry clearance did not interfere with  the  established
    pattern of the family life or  visits,  extended  stays  and  telephone
    contact.  When the judge said that he considered the visit of  a  child
    to visit their family in this  country  on  a  temporary  basis  was  a
    fundamental human right, there was no basis  in  law  for  the  judge's
    finding.  He did not have due regard to the case law  regarding  family
    life.  As such it was said the judge had erred in law and the  decision
    should be set aside.  Permission to appeal was  granted  and  thus  the
    matter came before me on the above date.

 3. Before me Mr Tufan relied on  the  grounds  and  also  referred  me  to
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112  (IAC),  Adjei
    (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 and  finally  SS  (Congo)  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  In particular I was referred to paragraph 24
    of Mostafa in that it would only be  "in  very  unusual  circumstances"
    that a person other than a close relative  would  be  able  to  show  a
    refusal of entry clearance came within the scope of Article  8(1).   In
    practical terms this was likely  to  be  limited  to  cases  where  the
    relationship was that of husband and wife or other close life  partners
    or a parent and minor child.  The judge had found  that  the  Appellant
    would not attempt to come here to live permanently.  That  finding  was
    irrational given the immigration history of the Appellant.

 4. I was asked to set the decision aside and  re-make  it  dismissing  the
    appeal.

 5. For the Appellant Mr Abdullah, the Sponsor was  in  attendance  and  he
    said he wanted his daughter to be a part of his life.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. As was said in Adjei if Article 8 is engaged the Tribunal may  need  to
    look at the extent to which the claimant is said to have failed to meet
    the  requirements  of  the   Rule   because   that   may   inform   the
    proportionality balancing exercise that must follow.

 8. It seems to me relevant to note here the judge found that Article 8 was
    engaged (there is no challenge to that) and went on to say in paragraph
    21  that  he  accepted  she  met  the  maintenance  and   accommodation
    requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He  was
    satisfied that  her  father  could  provide  adequate  maintenance  and
    accommodation for her and he also accepted that  she  intended  only  a
    visit and had the necessary intention to leave the  United  Kingdom  at
    the end of it.  Having heard the evidence that was a finding  that  the
    judge was entitled to make and there is  no  challenge  to  it  in  the
    grounds of application.

 9. In paragraph 16 the judge did point out  the  strength  of  the  family
    relationships at the date of the Respondent's decision.  He noted  that
    at the time of the  Respondent's  decision  the  Appellant  was  wholly
    dependent upon her family living, as she then was, in a foreign country
    as a refugee.  He found that her  situation  constituted  the  type  of
    special dependency envisaged by Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31  and
    found that at the time of the decision there  was  a  "strong  bond  of
    family life between the Appellant and her family in this country".   He
    said it was not difficult to imagine that it represented something of a
    psychological lifeline to her.  The judge went on to  consider  whether
    the interference was necessary  and  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end sought to be achieved and bore in  mind  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  He accepted that  her  father  would  be
    able to maintain her during her visit and accepted that she  would  not
    be a burden on taxpayers.  He recognised, entirely  properly,  that  it
    would only be in very rare cases  identified  on  an  individual  basis
    where a decision to allow an appeal on human rights  grounds  would  be
    appropriate when the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

10. In paragraph 22 the judge went on to say that he found for the  reasons
    he had given that to allow the Appellant to visit her  family  in  this
    country would not in fact be contrary to the objective  of  maintaining
    an effective system of immigration control.

11. For the reasons he gave  the  judge  was  effectively  saying  that  he
    regarded the factual circumstances in this case as exceptional.   There
    is nothing said in Mostafa or Adjei which bars a judge from allowing an
     appeal on human rights grounds in relation to someone trying to see  a
    member of the family - rather, as said in Mostafa this would only arise
    in very unusual circumstances.  However that is the  very  position  we
    have in this appeal.  The judge gave clear and cogent  reasons  why  he
    was allowing the appeal explaining why the facts of this  case  set  it
    apart from the usual case of a daughter wishing to visit her family  in
    the UK.

12. In these circumstances there is no error of law and the  decision  must
    stand.

Notice of Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

14. I do not set aside the decision.

15. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
