
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/01003/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly    |Decision & Reason  Promulgated    |
|On 12 December 2014               |On 29 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD DAUD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne  promulgated  on
    14  August  2014  which  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 15 April 1971 and is a citizen  of  Pakistan.
    On 12 December 2013 the Appellant applied for entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as a family visitor.

 4. On 13 January 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application and because the application was made after 25 June 2013 the
    refusal notice made clear that an appeal against refusal could only  be
    brought under section 84 (1) (c) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) on grounds relating to (i) human  rights
    and (ii) race relations grounds.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thorne ("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. He found that there was a right of appeal because the  Appellant
    was applying to visit a family member and he found that  the  Appellant
    had sufficient links with Pakistan to establish a motive to return;  he
    found that the documents he produced were genuine  and  reliable;  that
    the sponsor had sponsored other family members who  had  complied  with
    their conditions of stay.

 6. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  25  September  2013  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes gave permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
    Judge had failed to recognise that there was a limited right of appeal.

 7. The Appellant did not attend the appeal but his sponsor  Samiyah  Zahid
    attended court on his behalf. I explained the nature of the proceedings
    to her. She understood the position.

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr McVitie  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that he relied on the grounds of appeal.

Finding on Material Error

 9. Having heard those submissions I/we reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

10. This was an appeal against a refusal of entry  clearance  made  by  the
    Appellant on 12 December 2013.

11. Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 amended s88A  of  the  2002
    Act so as to remove the right of appeal for persons visiting  specified
    family members. Although they are still able to bring an appeal on  the
    residual grounds in s 84(1) (b) and (c) of  the  2002  Act,  namely  on
    human rights and race relations grounds.

12. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine whether
    the Appellant could succeed on the basis  of  the  limited  grounds  of
    appeal that were open to him rather than on the merits under the  Rules
    constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider to be  material
    since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome  could  have
    been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

13. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety. I indicated to both parties that I was able to  re  hear  the
    case and they both indicated that they were content to proceed.

14. The sponsor gave evidence that the Appellant was her uncle and  it  had
    been 10 years since she had last seen him. Her mother, his sister,  had
    last seen him 4 years ago when she travelled to Pakistan and stayed  at
    her family home. Ms Zahid had been unable to travel to  see  her  uncle
    because she was studying then working. She  confirmed  that  there  was
    nothing stopping her from travelling to Pakistan just that the majority
    of their relations were in the United Kingdom and it would  be  cheaper
    and more convenient for him to come to  the  United  Kingdom  than  for
    family members to visit him.

15. In final submissions Mr McVitie submitted that while  he  had  sympathy
    for the Appellant and his sponsor there was no breach of Article  8  in
    the decision to refuse entry clearance.

Findings

16. The Appellant is a Pakistani national who sought entry clearance to the
    United Kingdom as a family visitor to see his sister and his niece, the
    sponsor who appeared before me.

17. I have considered this appeal by reference to the limited grounds  that
    are available to the Appellant.  I  am  satisfied  that  there  was  no
    evidence  that  the  decision  was  unlawful  on  the  basis   of   any
    discrimination in the exercise of a public function in relation to race
    as defined in the Equality Act 2010. There is no suggestion that any of
    the parties to the proceedings are disabled.

18. Having heard the evidence of Ms Zahid that there is nothing to stop any
    family member from visiting the  Appellant  in  Pakistan  and  enjoying
    family and private life with him there I am satisfied that there is  no
    evidence that the decision is contrary to the Human  rights  Convention
    rendering the decision incompatible with the parties Article 8 rights.

DECISION

19. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
    of an error of law and I set aside the decision and remade it.

20. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 24.12.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
