


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01569/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 22 December 2016                         |On: 23 December 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               md nazrul islam
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Nurun Khatun (the Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 3 December 1993. He  has
   been given permission to appeal against the determination  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
   decision to refuse entry clearance as a family visitor under paragraph 41
   of HC 395.

2. The appellant applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom to  visit
   his brother and sister-in-law and their children. The respondent  refused
   the application in a decision dated 29 January 2015.


3. The basis for the refusal  decision  was  that  the  respondent  did  not
   accept that the appellant planned to leave the UK at the end of his visit
   or that he was genuinely seeking entry as a  visitor  for  a  period  not
   exceeding six months and concluded that he could not, therefore, meet the
   requirements in paragraph 41(i) and (ii) of the  immigration  rules.  The
   respondent's reasons for reaching that conclusion were that the appellant
   had, on a previous visit to the UK in 2012, stayed for longer than stated
   in his application form, namely two months instead of three  weeks;  that
   he had provided no evidence of his studies in Bangladesh; and that he had
   failed to demonstrate his financial ties to Bangladesh.

4. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Boylan-Kemp.  The  sponsor,  the  appellant's
   sister-in-law, Nurun Khatun, gave oral  evidence  before  the  judge  and
   explained why the appellant had stayed longer during his  previous  visit
   and why he would return to Bangladesh after his visit. She gave  evidence
   that there were close ties between the appellant and her own children and
   that it would be difficult for  her  and  her  family  to  visit  him  in
   Bangladesh due to their work commitments and the financial cost. She said
   that her husband had visited Bangladesh in 2015, but only due to a family
   emergency.  At  [13]  the  judge  accepted  the  sponsor's  evidence  and
   explanations  but  considered  that  the  respondent's  conclusions  were
   nevertheless right and proper on the evidence available at the  time  the
   decision was made. The judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  respondent's
   decision amounted to such an  interference  with  the  appellant's  human
   rights as to infringe his Article 8 rights and considered that the public
   interest outweighed the appellant's interests in the UK.  She  considered
   that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry   clearance   was   proportionate.
   Accordingly she dismissed the appeal.

5. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on grounds  which
   were, I believe,  prepared  by  the  sponsor.  Permission  was  initially
   refused in the First-tier Tribunal, but subsequently granted in the Upper
   Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb, who  found  that  the  judge  had
   arguably erred in her approach to Article 8 in two respects. Firstly, she
   appeared to have accepted at [13] that the appellant met the  immigration
   rules and, if that was the case, that was arguably an important factor in
   considering Article 8. Secondly, she used terminology which was  arguably
   inappropriate in an entry clearance case.

Appeal hearing

6. At the hearing before me, Mr Wilding relied on the cases of  Kaur  (visit
   appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487 and Adjei (visit visas -  Article  8)
   (Rev 1) [2015] UKUT 261. He accepted that the judge had erred by  failing
   to consider whether Article 8 was engaged on the basis of family life but
   submitted that that was immaterial as he had found that there would be no
   interference. Article 8 was not engaged, but even if it was, there was no
   disproportionate breach and there were no compelling circumstances.

7. In response, Ms Khatun made detailed submissions,  referring  to  various
   cases including Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  112.
   She submitted that Article 8 was engaged on the  basis  of  family  life,
   between two brothers who were  very  close.  She  gave  reasons  why  the
   appellant would return to Bangladesh after his visit.

Consideration and findings.

8. As Judge Grubb found  in  granting  permission,  it  is  not  clear,  but
   appears to be the case, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted  that
   the appellant met the requirements of the immigration rules as a visitor.
   There is certainly a lack of clarity in her reasoning in [13] but in  any
   event it is clear that she accepted  the  sponsor's  evidence  about  the
   appellant's previous extended stay in the UK.

9. However it seems to me that  that  cannot  assist  the  appellant  in  an
   appeal in which the only permissible ground (other  than  race  relations
   which was agreed did not apply) is human rights, and where Article  8  is
   not engaged. Clearly an ability to meet the immigration rules may well be
   a matter of some weight in assessing proportionality under Article 8,  as
   found by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Mostafa,  and  an  assessment  of  an
   applicant's intentions may  assist  in  considering  the  genuineness  of
   family ties (Kaur, at [13]), but it is of no assistance if Article  8  is
   simply not engaged. That was the finding of the Upper Tribunal in  Adjei,
   which said at [9]:


      "If it is not, which will not infrequently be the case,  the  Tribunal
      has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of  the  decision  of
      the ECO under the rules and should not do so. If article 8 is engaged,
      the Tribunal will need to look at the extent to which the claimant  is
      said to have failed to meet the requirements of the rule because  that
      will inform the proportionality balancing exercise that must follow."

10. In this case Judge Boylan-Kemp clearly erred  by  failing  to  make  any
   findings as to whether Article 8 was engaged on the basis of family life,
   but simply went on to an assessment of proportionality.

11. It was the submission of the sponsor, Ms Khatun, that there  was  family
   life between the appellant and her husband, his brother, and between  the
   appellant and her children, as they were very close. She  relied  on  the
   decision in Mostafa in submitting that family  life  could  include  ties
   between close relatives. However, at [24]  the  Upper  Tribunal  said  as
   follows:


      "We are, however, prepared to say that it will only be in very unusual
      circumstances that a person other than a close relative will be able
      to show that the refusal of entry clearance comes within the scope of
      Article 8(1). In practical terms this is likely to be limited to cases
      where the relationship is that of husband and wife or other close life
      partners or a parent and minor child and even then it will not
      necessarily be extended to cases where, for example, the proposed
      visit is based on a whim or will not add significantly to the time
      that the people involved spend together."


12. Both Kaur and Adjei referred, or alluded to, the principles in  Kugathas
   v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  in
   requiring there to be some form  of  dependency  over  and  above  normal
   emotional  ties  when  considering  relationships  between  adult  family
   members for the purposes of establishing the existence of family life  in
   Article 8 terms. In this appellant's case, it  cannot  possibly  be  said
   that the relationship between him  and  his  brother,  or  his  brother's
   family including the children amounts to family life for the purposes  of
   Article 8. Clearly the relationships do not fall within Appendix FM,  but
   neither do they fall within the concept of family life outside the  rules
   on a wider Article 8 consideration. Whilst the appellant may be close  to
   his brother and his brother's family, they live  in  different  countries
   and rarely see each other. The last visit of any substance  was  in  2012
   when the appellant came to  the  UK  and,  other  than  a  visit  by  the
   sponsor's family to Bangladesh in 2012 and a  visit  by  the  appellant's
   brother in 2015, there  has  been  no  face-to-face  contact.  There  is,
   furthermore, no suggestion of any dependency between  the  appellant  and
   his brother. On the contrary it is said that the appellant  is  dependent
   upon his  family  in  Bangladesh.  Accordingly  there  is  no  basis  for
   concluding  that  family  life  exists  between  the  appellant  and  his
   relatives in the UK. Plainly Article 8 is not engaged and  the  appellant
   is unable  to  show  that  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  entry
   clearance to the UK amounted to an interference  with,  or  in  the  more
   appropriate terms for entry clearance cases, a lack of  respect  for  the
   appellant's family life or indeed the family life of his relatives.  That
   is the end of the matter and the appellant simply cannot  succeed  in  an
   appeal on human rights grounds.

13. Accordingly, Judge Boylan-Kemp was  entitled  to  conclude,  and  indeed
   could have reached no other conclusion, that the decision to refuse entry
   clearance to the appellant did not amount to a breach of  Article  8.  As
   such, whilst the judge made errors of law in her approach to  Article  8,
   those errors were not material to the outcome of the appeal. In any event
   the same result would be achieved by setting aside her decision  and  re-
   making the decision by dismissing the appeal on the same grounds.


14. As I advised Ms Khatun, the best course would be for  the  appellant  to
   make a fresh entry clearance application with the benefit of the positive
   findings made by Judge Boylan-Kemp in regard to his  intentions  and  his
   ability to meet the immigration rules as a visitor. For the  purposes  of
   this appeal, however, and given that the grounds  are  limited  to  human
   rights grounds, he simply cannot succeed.

DECISION

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error of law such that the  decision  needs  to  be  set
   aside. I do not set aside the  decision.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
   appeal therefore stands.








Signed                                                    Date 23/12/2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
