

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/01443/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 21st October 2014                         |On 23rd January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Rashid Razzaq
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     -
For the Respondent:    Mr Ghaffar, Sponsor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan date of birth  18th  December
      1986. On the 29th May 2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Coates)
      allowed his appeal against a decision to refuse  to  grant  him  entry
      clearance as a visitor. The Entry Clearance Officer now has permission
      to appeal against that decision[1].


   2. The Respondent had applied for entry clearance with his  mother.  They
      wished to visit relatives in the UK. Those relatives were his mother's
      sister and her husband. The applications were refused on  the  grounds
      that the ECO was not satisfied that  the  Respondent  and  his  mother
      would be adequately maintained during their trip to the UK; nor was he
      satisfied that they were genuine visitors who intended  to  return  to
      Pakistan, thereby leaving the UK. All of these matters  were  resolved
      in their favour  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  made  positive
      findings of fact about the bona fides of both appellants before it and
      their sponsor.  None  of  those  findings  are  now  challenged.   The
      appeals were both allowed.


   3. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is brought on the grounds  that  the
      Respondent did not have a full right of appeal before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. The relatives that he seeks to visit are his aunt, uncle (Mr
      Ghaffar) and cousins. This refusal was dated 29th December 2012, after
      the  commencement  of  the  Immigration   Appeals   (Family   Visitor)
      Regulations 2012 which provide for a full right of  appeal  where  the
      applicant seeks to visit a close family member as defined at  2(2)(a)-
      (d) of those Regulations.  The relatives listed at Regulation 2 do not
      include an aunt, uncle  or  cousins.   The  right  of  appeal  of  the
      Respondent was therefore limited to those grounds set out in s84(1)(b)
      and (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. An appeal  could  only
      be brought on human rights or race discrimination grounds.


   4. It does not  appear  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  who
      represented the ECO made this point before Judge Coates. It is however
      clear from the refusal notice which does state that the appeal grounds
      are limited.


   5. I am satisfied that the determination does contain an error of law  in
      that the First-tier Tribunal has not addressed human  rights  or  race
      discrimination grounds, and purports to allow the appeal outright when
      there was no power to do so.  I therefore set the  decision  aside  to
      that extent. All the findings  of  fact  made  by  Judge  Coates  were
      properly reasoned and available to  him  on  the  evidence.  They  are
      unchallenged and preserved.


   6. As I explained to Mr Ghaffar the grounds  of  appeal  upon  which  the
      appeal is to be re-made are limited.  He  agreed  that  there  was  no
      evidence of any racial discrimination on the  part  of  the  ECO.   In
      respect of human rights he pointed out that the Respondent in  essence
      wished to travel to the UK in order to accompany his mother, since  it
      is not considered culturally  acceptable  for  her  to  be  travelling
      alone. Whilst I accept this is true, I am not satisfied that this is a
      matter which engages the UK's  obligations  under  the  ECHR.  If  his
      mother wishes to have a male companion as she travels,  she  could  of
      course ask someone who has  a  visa  or  who  is  not  subject  to  UK
      immigration control to accompany her.


   7. The appeal is dismissed. The ECO will however no doubt  wish  to  have
      regard to the fact that a very experienced First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      made positive findings of fact to the effect that the Respondent is  a
      genuine visitor who met all of the requirements of paragraph 41 at the
      date of decision. The ECO will also no doubt wish to  have  regard  to
      the matters mentioned above, and in doing so I hope  that  he  or  she
      exercises discretion in the Respondent's favour  and  grants  him  his
      visit visa.


      Decisions


   8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  and
      it is set aside.


   9. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


  10. I make no direction as to anonymity. No such direction  was  requested
      and I see no reason to make one.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           21st October 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on the 19th
June 2014

