
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01978/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th September, 2016               |On 14 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

                           dr mohammad abul kashem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr L Tarlow
For the Respondent:    Mr Mohammad Hossain


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her as  being,  "the
    claimant".

2.   The respondent is Dr Mohammad Abul Kashem,  a  national  of  Bangladesh
    who was born on 1st June, 1953.  He is, I  believe  a  retired  medical
    consultant.  The respondent made application for entry clearance to the
    visit the  United  Kingdom,  but  his  application  was  refused  under
    paragraph 41 of Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules  HC  395  as
    amended ('immigration rules").

3.   On 16th March, 2015, the respondent appealed that decision and, as  the
    refusal notice of the claimant pointed out, the grounds of appeal  were
    limited by Section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

4.   The appeal came for hearing before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blair,
    who decided the appeal in Glasgow on 9th December, 2015 without an oral
    hearing.

5.   He considered the refusal notice and noted  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had refused the application because in a one year period,  from
    September 2014, the respondent will have spent some eight  and  a  half
    months in the United Kingdom.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that the respondent was genuinely seeking entry as a visitor,
    or that he intended to leave the United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  his
    visit.

6.   The judge first considered the matter in the context  of  the  relevant
    immigration rule, paragraph 41 and considered the  evidence  which  had
    been submitted by the respondent. In paragraph 18 of the determination,
    the judge expressed the  view  that  the  respondent  clearly  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

7.   The judge then went on in the  determination,  in  two  paragraphs,  to
    purport to allow the appeal on the basis of the appellant's  Article  8
    family life rights with his daughter.

8.   The claimant challenged the determination on the basis that  there  was
    no evidence before the judge  which  would  enable  him  to  find  that
    Article 8 family life rights were engaged; there appeared to be no ties
    between the appellant and his adult daughter disclosed by the  evidence
    before the judge, either emotional or financial, sufficient  to  engage
    Article 8.

9.   The Secretary of State relied on the decisions in MS (Article 8  family
    life  dependency  proportionality)  Uganda  [2004]  UKIAT   00064;   on
    paragraph 25 of Kugathus v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31; ZB (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 834; and  Ghising  and  Others  [2013]  UKUT
    00567 (IAC).

10.  The  claimant  is  represented  by  Mr  Tarlow  a  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer before me today.  Mr Mohammad  Hossain  appeared  on
    behalf of the respondent.  He  confirmed  that  he  was  not  receiving
    financial payment to appear on behalf of the respondent and I agreed to
    allow him to present the case on behalf of the respondent.

11.  I opened the proceedings by explaining the purpose of  today's  hearing
    and explaining that it was only if I found that there was an  error  of
    law in the judge's determination, that I could interfere with it.

12.  I explained that more recently, in April this year, the Tribunal  heard
    a case Adjei (visit visas Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 which pointed out
    that while the requirements of the immigration rules and the extent  to
    which a respondent had failed to satisfy those requirements,  might  be
    relevant to the consideration of an Article 8 appeal, Adjei pointed out
    that it was first necessary to establish  that  there  were  Article  8
    family life rights which were to be breached.

13.  Mr Hossein confirmed that the appellant's daughter is  a  32  year  old
    married lady.  She is a medical doctor and  is  herself  married  to  a
    consultant.  She studied in the  United  Kingdom  and  was  successful,
    after six years of study, in qualifying as a doctor and  more  recently
    she has acquired further  qualifications  as  a  member  of  the  Royal
    College of Physicians.

14.  I explained to Mr Hossain that  there  needed  to  have  been  evidence
    before the judge of some form of dependency between the respondent  and
    his  adult  married  daughter,  who  appeared  now  to  be  living   an
    independent life in the United Kingdom.  He explained that the daughter
    was financially dependent on her father, who had  given  her  gifts  of
    money to purchase a property in the United Kingdom.

15.  I pointed out that there was no evidence of that before the judge,  but
    he suggested that the Entry Clearance Officer made the  wrong  decision
    in the application and in refusing the application.  The  decision  was
    wrong because it was based on wrong information and that amounts to  an
    error of law.  The Entry Clearance Officer, he suggested, claimed  that
    the respondent had overstayed, but in fact there was no question of the
    respondent ever overstaying his leave in the United Kingdom.

16   Having explained the purpose of the hearing  to  Mr  Hossein,  I  heard
    from Mr Tarlow who told me that he relied on  the  grounds  which  were
    brief and specific.  The judge had  allowed  an  Article  8  appeal  in
    respect of a proposed visit  by  the  respondent  to  visit  his  adult
    daughter, following the birth  of  her  first  child,  on  family  life
    grounds.

17.  The judge found that the respondent met the requirements  of  paragraph
    41, but he erred because, he failed first to find whether or not  there
    was family life between the respondent  and  the  sponsor.   Mr  Tarlow
    asked me to find an error of law and to remake the decision myself.

18.  I gave  Mr  Hossain  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  the  respondent's
    daughter and her husband, who were present in the hearing room, to  see
    whether between the three of them they would like to raise any  further
    points and so that he could clarify the matters before  addressing  me.
    They left the hearing room for a few minutes to  confir.   On  resuming
    the hearing, Mr Hossain told me  that  he  was  ready  to  proceed  and
    explained that the respondent was a frequent visitor not  only  to  the
    United Kingdom, but also to  other  countries,  and  as  a  result  the
    refusal would have an adverse effect on the respondent and  his  future
    life.  He told me that there was nothing further he wished to add.

19.  I have concluded that Judge Blair did materially  err  in  law  in  his
    determination.  The consideration of Article 8 in his determination  is
    set out in paragraphs 19 and 20.  Having at paragraph 18 found that the
    respondent clearly  met  the  immigration  rules,  the  judge  said  at
    paragraphs 19 and 20

         "19. There was no substance to the position  the  [respondent]  had
             moved the centre of his life to the United  Kingdom.   It  was
             evident from his application form for example that in the last
             few years he has visited many countries including  the  United
             Kingdom but also including India, Turkey,  Saudi  Arabia,  the
             United States and Nepal.  I could detect no basis for it being
             maintained that the [respondent] had ever breached immigration
             control and I could not see in this case any basis for holding
             that either.

         20.  It is evident that the [respondent] has very close ties to his
             daughter and in turn now has her  own  child.   A  very  young
             child cannot reasonably be expected to  travel  to  Bangladesh
             moreover attendance at an important ceremony in his daughter's
             life and career as a doctor  in  my  view  also  is  something
             bought by the notion of family life protected by Article 8 and
             in my view of the circumstances the  decision  to  refuse  the
             [respondent's] entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  did
             breach his right to respect for family life  under  Article  8
             and I allow the appeal."

20.  The judge failed to have any regard  to  the  guidance  given  by  Lord
    Bingham in Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]
    UKHL 27, and go through the stages suggested in that decision.  Had  he
    done so, he would first have asked whether family life existed  between
    the respondent and his daughter.

21.  I appreciate and accept that the respondent ,quite rightly,  must  feel
    terribly proud that his daughter  has  worked  so  hard  that  she  has
    qualified as a medical practitioner in the United Kingdom and  extended
    her qualifications by  becoming  a  member  of  the  Royal  College  of
    Physicians.  It is only natural that any father in those  circumstances
    would want to see his daughter attend the Convocation.  It is also  not
    at all difficult to understand why the respondent would wish to  travel
    to the United Kingdom to see his daughter's first child  following  the
    birth.  I accept that there are always strong ties between a parent and
    a child, but as the courts  have  previously  said,  there  can  be  no
    Article 8 family life rights between a parent  and  their  adult  child
    without some evidence of continuing dependency.

22.  Mr Hossain, without intending to give me evidence,  told  me  that  the
    respondent had provided money to his daughter and her husband  for  the
    purchase of a property in the United Kingdom.  That, with  respect  may
    be evidence  of  a  gift,  but  it  is  hardly  evidence  of  financial
    dependency.  The appellant's daughter is a 32 year  old  professionally
    qualified lady, with her own income and she is married to  a  colleague
    who himself enjoys an income.  The making of a gift  of  money  towards
    the purchase of a house does not amount to financial dependency.

23.  In the respondent's papers, reference is made to Mostafa (Article 8  in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00122, where the Tribunal  found  that  in
    the case of appeals brought against refusal of  entry  clearance  under
    Article 8  of  the  ECHR,  the  respondent's  ability  to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal,
    but it is capable of being a weighty though  not  determinative  factor
    when deciding whether refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim of
    enforcing control.

24.  However, the case of Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015]  UKUT  0261
    makes is clear that the first  question  to  be  addressed  in  appeals
    against refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where only  human
    rights grounds are available, is whether  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  is
    engaged at all.  Judge Blair did not do this.  Judge Blair  appears  to
    have assumed that there was Article 8 family life in existence.

25.  In Adjei the Tribunal said if Article 8 is not engaged, which will  not
    infrequently be the case, the Tribunal has no  jurisdiction  to  embark
    upon an assessment of the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer under
    the Rules and should not do so.  If Article 8 is engaged, the  Tribunal
    may need to look at the extent to which the Claimant is  said  to  have
    failed to meet the requirements of the Rules, because they  may  inform
    the proportionality balancing exercise that may follow.  It is clear to
    me that Judge Blair simply did not consider whether or  not  there  was
    family life and  merely  assumed  that  it  existed.  The  relationship
    between the respondent and his daughter is one between adult  relatives
    disclosing no aspect of any dependency nor  being  any  different  from
    what might expect to be the case between an adult father and his  adult
    daughter.

26.  There is no evidence of any particularly  strong  relationship  between
    the respondent and his daughter over and above that  between  a  father
    and daughter and no evidence financial dependency.  There is no  reason
    why those relationships between  an  adult  respondent  and  his  adult
    daughter cannot be maintained in the way that relatives who have chosen
    to live in different countries manage to do.  There is no  good  reason
    why UK based  relatives  cannot  visit  the  respondent  in  Bangladesh
    although, I accept that at the time the purpose  for  the  respondent's
    visit was two-fold and naturally he would wish to see his  daughter  at
    her convocation, especially since she has  joined  his  profession  and
    would, of course have had a strong desire to see his grandchild.

27.  Having concluded that Article 8 is not  engaged,  I  believe  that  the
    judge has materially erred in law since, on  the  evidence  before  the
    judge,  the circumstances of this respondent and his  daughter  in  the
    United Kingdom did not give rise to family  life  for  the  purpose  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

25.  I substitute a  fresh  decision  to  dismiss  the  respondent's  appeal
    against the refusal to grant him entry clearance as a visitor.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

7th September 2016
