
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01657/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd February 2015                          |On 12th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                NASEEM AKHTER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik of Counsel instructed by Malik Legal
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Gladstone
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 12th September 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1st January 1954.   She
    applied to come to the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  but  was  refused
    under paragraphs 41 and 320(7A) of the Immigration  Rules.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that  the  Sponsor's  employment
    letter was genuine.

 3. The Appellant appealed on the grounds that she  was  being  denied  her
    rights to family life under Article 8.

 4. The judge said that she had no jurisdiction to determine the appeal  in
    relation to paragraph 320(7A) and  none  to  determine  the  appeal  in
    relation to paragraph 41 because the full  right  of  appeal  had  been
    removed under Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013.

 5. The judge recorded that the Appellant had visited the UK  in  2009  but
    subsequently in 2010, 2011 and 2012 had been refused visas.   She  said
    that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of family life under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and did not  consider  that  there
    were compelling circumstances as identified in Gulshan (Article 8 - new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00649.  There were no  compelling
    circumstances as to why the Sponsor could not travel  to  Pakistan  and
    contact by other means could take place, and she dismissed  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to consider the case in the light of the five stage test  of
    Razgar and had not taken into account relevant facts so far as  Article
    8 was concerned.

 7. Substantial documentary evidence had been produced  which  demonstrated
    that paragraph 320(7A) had been wrongly applied and  as  a  consequence
    the Appellant was potentially subject to a ten year ban.   The  Sponsor
    explained that he had been working at Kinnaird  College  at  Manchester
    since December 2013 and had provided documentary evidence to  establish
    that he had been so employed.  The college's Director had informed  the
    Entry Clearance Officer that the document produced was not genuine  but
    has subsequently  confirmed  that  there  had  been  an  administrative
    oversight in denying the authenticity of the letter.  There is  ongoing
    legal action against her.

 8. The Appellant has property as well as two children who are  settled  in
    Pakistan and has previously visited the UK and complied with her  terms
    and conditions.  She intends to return.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Zucker on 11th December 2014.
     Judge Zucker said that arguably the original  judge  was  required  to
    determine the 320(7A) point in order to properly consider the issue  of
    proportionality both now and in  respect  of  any  future  applications
    which the Appellant might make.  It was also arguable that the  judge's
    approach to Article 8 generally was flawed.

Submissions

10. Mr Karnik submitted that  the  refusal  under  paragraph  320  was  not
    covered by the removal of the full right of appeal against  refusal  of
    entry clearance to visit the UK set out in paragraph 52  of  the  Crime
    and Courts Act 2013, because the impact of a paragraph 320 refusal  was
    much more severe than a refusal under paragraph 41.  He also  submitted
    that, once the Appellant had passed through the gateway of  being  able
    to argue a breach of her human rights, then all issues were at large.

11. The fact that the Rules provided for family visits  was  a  recognition
    that families required a particular form of protection.  The  ten  year
    ban was an interference with the Appellant's and Sponsor's private  and
    family life.  The fact that the Entry Clearance Officer  had  acted  so
    swiftly upon the information from the  college  was  unfair  since  the
    Appellant had no opportunity of countering the accusation made  in  the
    report.

12. He submitted that the Tribunal was  bound  to  reach  a  conclusion  in
    respect of the 320  point  in  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision.  He relied on the decision  of  R  (on  the  application  of)
    Gudanaviciene & Others v the Director of Legal  Aid  Casework  and  the
    Lord Chancellor [2014] EWCA Civ 1622 which was concerned with legal aid
    in immigration cases, and relied on the following passage:

         "The focus of article 6(1) is to ensure  a  fair  determination  of
         civil rights  and  obligations  by  an  independent  and  impartial
         tribunal. Article 8 does not dictate  the  form  of  the  decision-
         making process that the state must put in place. But the  focus  of
         the procedural aspect of article  8  is  to  ensure  the  effective
         protection of an individual's article 8 rights.  To  summarise,  in
         determining what  constitutes  effective  access  to  the  tribunal
         (article 6(1)) and what constitutes  sufficient  involvement  in  a
         decision-making process  (article  8),  for  present  purposes  the
         standards are in practice the same."

13. Fairness required a sufficient protection of the Appellant's interests.

14. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the  Appellant's  rights  of  appeal  were
    limited to human rights grounds and the legislation did not  allow  her
    to appeal on the grounds that the decision was not in  accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules.  The ten year ban would  not  necessarily  apply
    since the Appellant had produced evidence to show that the  information
    upon which the document verification report was based  was  flawed  and
    indeed the Entry Clearance Officer had  stated  in  the  decision  that
    future applications may be refused rather than would be refused. It was
    hard to see how Article 8 could be engaged in this case since there was
    no evidence that this was anything other  than  a  normal  relationship
    between parent and child.

Findings and Conclusions

15. Section 52 of the Crimes and Courts Act 2013 abolished the  full  right
    of appeal in family visitor visa cases preserving a  limited  right  of
    appeal on race relations and human rights grounds only.  In  this  case
    the Appellant  was  refused  under  paragraph  41,  because  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied that she had an intention to return
    to Pakistan, and paragraph 320 in reliance upon a false document.

16.  The  Appellant  was  refused  entry  clearance  under  two   different
    paragraphs of the Immigration Rules.  However the application which she
    made was to come to the United Kingdom as a visitor and  her  right  of
    appeal against that decision is limited to  race  relations  and  human
    rights grounds.  The fact that there is a  second  ground  for  refusal
    does not exempt the Appellant from the effect of the Crime  and  Courts
    Act 2013 in abolishing the right of appeal.

17. There is no appeal against this decision on the grounds that the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision was not in accordance with the law or  the
    Immigration Rules.

18. If it can be shown that the Respondent acted unfairly that would  be  a
    relevant consideration for the purpose  of  assessing  proportionality.
    The problem for this Appellant however is that, in order to  reach  the
    fifth Razgar question she has to establish that the decision interferes
    with her right to private and family life.

19. Mr Karnik accepted that private life is not at  issue  here  since  the
    Appellant is not in the UK and has only been here  as  a  visitor  some
    five years ago.  He said that there was an interference with her  right
    to family life but he has adduced no  evidence  at  all  to  show  that
    family life exists in this case. There is  absolutely  nothing  in  the
    evidence to show that there are more than  the  normal  emotional  ties
    between the Appellant, the mother and the Sponsor, her adult child.

20. Moreover, even if the issue of proportionality was reached it  is  hard
    to see how the Entry Clearance Officer acted unfairly in relying on the
    clear information before him which was that the Sponsor had produced  a
    false document.  The fact that the Sponsor has  now  provided  evidence
    that reliance on that document was mistaken  does  not  mean  that  the
    original decision was taken unfairly.  There is  no  obligation  on  an
    Entry Clearance Officer to ask for comments from  the  Sponsor  on  the
    information in a document verification report before acting on it.

21. The Appellant now has clear evidence to refute the information  in  the
    report.  That evidence will be  taken  into  account  in  a  subsequent
    application when consideration is given whether it would  be  right  to
    invoke paragraph 320(7B).  It is hard to see how the Appellant  has  in
    fact been prejudiced save by the fact that she no longer has a right of
    appeal against the refusal to grant her a visit visa, which is a matter
    for Parliament and not the Tribunal. The Court of Appeal's decision has
    no relevance here.

22. Since neither family nor private life is established in  this  case  it
    follows that there can be no breach of the United Kingdom's obligations
    under Article 8 by this decision and no error by the Immigration Judge.

Notice of Decision

The  original  judge  did  not  err  in  law.   The  Appellant's  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 10/02/2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

