
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01943/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2016                   |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                               mr abdul gudus
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, applied in 2008 and  again  twice
    in 2013 for a visa  to  visit  his  family  in  the  UK.   These  three
    applications were refused.  His  fourth,  made  in  January  2014,  was
    refused in March 2014, and the  decision  upheld  in  June  2014.   His
    ensuing appeal was heard by Judge Gandhi sitting at Richmond on 12  May
    2015.   Both  parties  were  represented.   The  Sponsor,  who  is  the
    Appellant's brother, gave evidence.  In a  decision  promulgated  on  3
    July 2015 the appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

2.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal.  This was refused by  Judge
    Osborne on 30 September 2015 in the following terms:

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal a Decision  and  Reasons
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gandhi  who  in  a  Decision  and
             Reasons promulgated 3  July  2015  dismissed  the  Appellant's
             appeal against the Respondent's refusal of entry clearance  as
             a family visitor under the Immigration Rules  but  allowed  it
             under Article 8 ECHR.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge made  a  material  error  of
             law.  The Judge found that the Appellant and Sponsor  have  no
             relationship beyond the normal emotional ties and that contact
             between the Appellant and Sponsor can be maintained as  it  is
             now via Skype and phone.  The Respondent submits that  as  the
             Judge found no family life, the Judge erred in  proceeding  to
             make a proportionality assessment.  Second, the  Judge  failed
             to give adequate reasons for findings on  a  material  matter.
             The Judge found that the Appellant's  private  life  had  been
             long  established.   The  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
             private life had been long established.  The Judge  failed  to
             give adequate reasons as to how the Appellant's  private  life
             can be said to be long established.  The  Appellant  lives  in
             Pakistan and there are no reasons  given  as  to  how  he  has
             established a private life in the UK.  The Appellant  has  not
             been in  the  UK  with  a  precarious  immigration  status  or
             unlawfully because he has not been in  the  UK  at  all.   The
             Judge erred in considering that to be relevant.

         3.   Contrary to what is stated in the grounds, in  a  careful  and
             well-reasoned determination the Judge set  out  the  pertinent
             issues, law, and even evidence relating to the  facts  of  the
             appeal.  In appeals of this nature it is the task of the Judge
             to make findings of fact on the basis of the evidence  and  to
             provide adequately clear reasons for those findings.  That  is
             precisely what the Judge did.  The findings made by the  Judge
             were properly open to him on the basis of the evidence  before
             him.  Additionally, the Judge manifestly demonstrated that  he
             had in mind the correct approach  to  Article  8.   The  Judge
             wholly appropriately adopted the step by step  approach  which
             was approved in the well established  case  of  Razgar  [2004]
             UKHL 27 and demonstrated that he had all appropriate Article 8
             issues in mind.  The Judge explained clearly in [27] and  [28]
             precisely why the Judge concluded that the Appellant's private
             life under Article 8 on the carefully balanced specific  facts
             of this particular appeal led to the appeal being allowed.

         4.   Neither the grounds nor the Decision and Reasons disclose  any
             arguable error of law."

3.   I observe what appears to me to be a contradiction within  the  reasons
    of Judge Osborne.  At paragraph 2 he stated that the judge erred whilst
    in paragraph 4 that there was no arguable error of law.

4.   On second application permission to appeal was granted  on  23  October
    2015 by Judge Alis in the following terms:

         "1.  The Respondent sought permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
             First-tier Judge Ghandi (sic) allowing the Appellant's  appeal
             against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  allow  the
             Appellant to visit the United Kingdom as a family  visitor  on
             human rights grounds.

         2.   Permission to appeal  was  initially  sought  from  First-tier
             Judge Osborne, which was refused.  The Respondent now seeks to
             renew her application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal.

         3.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  correctly  identified   that   the
             Appellant's appeal was limited to article  8  grounds  and  at
             paragraph [26] found that 'family life' for article 8 purposes
             did not exist because the  appellant  had  failed  show  (sic)
             continuing ties of emotional  or  other  dependency  over  and
             above the ordinary ties of affection that might be expected in
             such a  relationship.   However  the  appeal  was  allowed  on
             private life grounds with the First-tier tribunal  finding  at
             paragraph [27] that private life existed and a refusal, in the
             circumstances  of  this  case,  was  disproportionate.    Full
             reasons for that finding were given.

         4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne found no error  in  law  and
             the renewed grounds take issue with the First-tier  Tribunal's
             approach.

         5.   The first ground refers to the First-tier Tribunal's  approach
             to a family life but as the Tribunal found there was no family
             life for article 8 purposes I find no evidence to support this
             ground.

         6.   The second ground tackled  the  approach  to  the  appellant's
             private life with his father and vice versa.  In this regard I
             find there is an arguable  error  in  law.   In  allowing  the
             appeal on private life grounds it is arguable  the  First-tier
             Tribunal having concluded the rules were  met  simply  allowed
             the  appeal  on  article  8  grounds   finding   the   refusal
             disproportionate when in fact the first task was  to  consider
             whether private life was actually engaged.  In any event,  the
             parties are referred to Moon (Human Rights,  Entry  Clearance,
             Proportionality) [2005] UKIAT 112 and in particular  paragraph
             [68] which  appears  to  limit  article  8  appeals  in  entry
             clearance appeals to family life claims.

         7.   Permission to appeal is therefore granted."

5.   I have  reproduced  both  of  these  decisions  in  full  because  they
    circumscribe the areas of debate.

6.   The Appellant submitted a Rule 24 response of 31  January  2016,  which
    is effectively a skeleton argument.

7.   The Sponsor and three members of his family attended the error  of  law
    hearing on 1 February 2016.  As  Mr  Sellwood  submitted,  it  was  not
    entirely clear whether permission to appeal had been granted upon  both
    grounds.  Since they were interdependent, I directed that  both  should
    be eligible for argument.  The hearing took the  form  of  submissions,
    which I have taken into account, together with the Appellant's Rule  24
    response.  I reserved my decision.





Determination

8.   The genesis of the challenge to the decision of Judge  Gandhi  lies  in
    paragraphs 26 and 27.  At 26  she  found  that  the  ties  between  the
    Appellant and his father and brother, all adults, were  not  sufficient
    to engage Article 8 family life.  At 27, "Nevertheless I find there  is
    a private life between the appellant and his  father/brother."   Devoid
    of authority, I might conclude that private life cannot exist "between"
    an appellant and family members without  being  a  synonym  for  family
    life, and might have found this to be an error of law  upon  which  the
    subsequent proportionality assessment could not be  founded.   However,
    the authorities which I discuss preclude the matter being  so  disposed
    of.

9.   At paragraphs 15 and  16  Judge  Gandhi  recorded  that  the  Appellant
    wanted to visit his father, who was aged  85,  had  significant  health
    problems, had had a heart operation and could not travel, and  that  he
    also wished to visit the grave of his mother, whom he had not been able
    to visit because his previous applications had been refused.

10.  The essence of the challenge to the decision of  Judge  Gandhi  is  the
    extent to which Article 8 of the 1950 Convention is applicable to visit
    visa applications, either in relation  to  private  life,  because  the
    private life of an appellant will exist outside the UK, or at all.

11.  I consider the authorities cited in argument.

12.  Sun Myung Moon (Human rights,  entry  clearance,  proportionality)  USA
    [2005] UKIAT 00112 discussed at paragraph 68 the extent to which  human
    rights  could  be  invoked  by  non-nationals  living  abroad.   It  is
    discursive rather than directory, does not clearly distinguish  between
    family and private life and is arguably obiter dicta.  Dating  back  to
    the comparative pre-history of 2005, the issues which  it  raises  have
    been addressed in a quartet of cases in 2015.

13.  Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  00112  (IAC)  does
    not  draw  a  clear  distinction  between  private  and  family   life:
    paragraphs 9, 16, 17.  Only in very unusual circumstances, likely to be
    limited to relationships of husband and wife, other close life partners
    or parent and minor child, will a person other than a close relative be
    able to engage Article 8(1) in an entry clearance case, and  even  then
    this will not necessarily be extended  to  cases  of,  for  example,  a
    proposed visit based on a whim or not  involving  the  people  spending
    significant time together.  Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT
    00261 (IAC), held that the first question in visit visa  appeals  based
    upon human rights is whether Article 8  is  engaged  at  all,  and  not
    infrequently it will not be.  Abbasi and another (visits -  bereavement
    - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC) held that the refusal of a visa to
    foreign nationals seeking to enter the UK for a finite period  for  the
    purpose of mourning with family members the recent  death  of  a  close
    relative and visiting the grave of a  deceased  person  is  capable  of
    constituting a disproportionate interference with  the  rights  of  the
    persons concerned under Article 8,  and  that  the  question  is  fact-
    sensitive.  Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8)  [2015]  UKUT  00487  (IAC)
    held that in visit visa appeals based upon human  rights  the  starting
    point is the ability of the appellant to comply  with  the  visit  visa
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  the
    restriction of the grounds of appeal in visitor cases to  human  rights
    still requires judges to find facts and resolve resultant disputes.  In
    her decision Judge Gandhi discussed Mostafa, Adjei and Kaur.

14.  The consensus of authority  is  that,  the  more  so  with  visit  visa
    appeals now confined to human rights grounds, Article  8  has  a  role,
    even if in limited or even very unusual circumstances,  in  visit  visa
    appeals, and that there is not a clear distinction between private  and
    family life.   Such  circumstances  can  include  family  mourning  and
    visiting family graves.

15.  Visiting his mother's grave was one of the reasons for the  Appellant's
    application.  Visiting his very sick father, for what he had to  assume
    would be the last time, was another.  These are, I find,  very  unusual
    circumstances, far removed from a visit on a whim.

16.  I accordingly find that, in finding Article 8  to  be  applicable,  the
    judge did not err in law.  Her proportionality assessment followed  the
    Razgar paradigm, was structured and reasoned and reached  a  conclusion
    which was reasonably open to her from the evidence.  It  too  does  not
    disclose any error of law.

17.  The determination is accordingly upheld.

Decision

18.  The original decision does not contain an error of law and is upheld.

19.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated: 3 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
