
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA012332015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th June 2016                              |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - abu dhabi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                samina malik
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar of Counsel instructed by My Legal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (the ECO) appeals against the  decision  of
    Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  FTT)
    promulgated on 26th November 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female citizen of Pakistan born 17th March  1954  who
    applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a  visitor.   The
    application was made on the basis that the Claimant wished to visit her
    adult siblings and her mother in the United  Kingdom  and  intended  to
    stay for 60 days.

 4. The Claimant explained that her mother has a critical  heart  condition
    and therefore she had applied for a two year visa  so  that  she  could
    visit her mother if there is an emergency.

 5.  The  Claimant  explained  that  she  has  two  married  children   and
    grandchildren in Pakistan.  She is a widow and receives a pension,  and
    owns two apartments as well as having investments in national  savings.
    The Claimant indicated that  she  had  previously  visited  the  United
    Kingdom between 6th May 2013 and 25th  September  2013,  following  the
    death of her father in this country.

 6. The application was refused on 15th January  2015.   The  ECO  did  not
    accept that the Claimant had proved that she intended a genuine  visit,
    that she would leave the United Kingdom at the conclusion of her visit,
    nor that she could be maintained and accommodated in the United Kingdom
    without recourse to public funds or employment, or that she could  meet
    the cost of a return or onward journey.  The application was  therefore
    refused with reference to paragraph 41(i), (ii), (vi) and (vii), of the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. The ECO in the refusal notice pointed out that the Claimant only had  a
    limited right of appeal, which the ECO contended was limited to section
    84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the  2002
    Act) which relates to a breach of human rights.

 8. The Claimant entered an appeal, and the grounds are  brief,  contending
    that the ECO's decision breached her rights as an EEA national  or  the
    member of the family of an EEA national,  and  that  the  decision  was
    unlawful as it  breached  her  human  rights,  protected  by  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 9. The Claimant requested that her appeal be decided on the papers without
    an oral hearing.

10. The FTT decided the appeal on the papers, and found that  the  Claimant
    had established family life with her mother.  The FTT  found  that  the
    Claimant is able to speak English, and that adequate provision had been
    made for financial and economic self-sufficiency during her stay in the
    United Kingdom.  The FTT  took  into  account  that  the  Claimant  had
    previously visited the United Kingdom and returned.  The FTT found that
    a pressing need had been established for the visit, that being the  ill
    health of the Claimant's elderly  mother.   The  appeal  was  therefore
    allowed.

11. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It was
    contended that the  FTT had committed a material misdirection of law in
    that family life for the purposes of Article 8 will not normally  exist
    between adult siblings, parents and  adult  children  unless  something
    more exists than normal emotional ties.  The FTT had erred  by  stating
    that dependency existed, and  had  failed  to  adequately  explain  how
    Article 8 was engaged on that basis.

12. It was contended that there was no evidence that the Claimant's  mother
    was dependent in any way upon her.  It was contended that the  FTT  had
    failed to take into account the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in
    Adjei [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC).

13. It was also contended that  the  FTT  had  carried  out  an  inadequate
    proportionality assessment and had not explained why refusal of a  visa
    which  only  allowed  parties  to  be  together   temporarily   was   a
    disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge E B Grant  in  the  following
    terms;

         2.   The  grounds  contend  the  FTTJ  has  materially  misdirected
             himself and erred in law in his assessment of Article 8 in the
             visitor visa appeal for the adult Appellant in  respect  of  a
             visit to her siblings and mother when it is settled  law  that
             Article 8 is generally not engaged between adult siblings  and
             their parents in the absence of dependency.

         3.   The grounds may be argued.

15. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

Oral Submissions

16. Mr Kandola relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal.  It was submitted  that  there  was  no  adequate
    reasoning to support the finding of dependency between the Claimant and
    her mother.  The FTT had erred by finding that Article 8 was engaged.

17. In the alternative if Article 8 was engaged, the denial of a visit visa
    was  not  an  unlawful  infringement  of  Article  8  rights,  and  the
    proportionality assessment was inadequate.

18. Mr Jafar relied upon his skeleton argument  dated  3rd  June  2016  and
    argued that the FTT decision disclosed no material error of law.





19. Mr Jafar submitted that the FTT  had  not  acted  perversely,  and  was
    entitled to find that family life was engaged between the Claimant  and
    her mother on the basis of dependency.  I was asked to accept that  the
    FTT had identified eleven factors which constituted dependency and  set
    these out in paragraphs 7-9 of the decision.

20. Mr Jafar submitted that the grounds relied upon by the ECO amounted  to
    a disagreement with the sustainable conclusion reached by the  FTT  and
    did not amount to an error of law.  The proportionality assessment  was
    not  inadequate,  and   took   into   account   the   public   interest
    considerations set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. The correct approach to be followed when considering an appeal  against
    refusal of entry clearance when reliance is placed upon  Article  8  of
    the 1950 Convention is set out in the first paragraph of  the  headnote
    to Adjei which for ease of reference I set out below;

         "1.  The first question  to  be  addressed  in  an  appeal  against
             refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human
             rights grounds are available is whether Article 8 of the  ECHR
             is engaged at all.  If it is not, which will not  infrequently
             be the case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to  embark  upon
             an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the  rules  and
             should not do so.  If Article 8 is engaged, the  Tribunal  may
             need to look at the extent to which the Claimant  is  said  to
             have failed to meet the requirements of the rule because  that
             may inform the proportionality balancing  exercise  that  must
             follow.  Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT
             112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition."

23. The FTT recognised that the initial question to be answered was whether
    Article 8 was engaged, and concluded in paragraph 10;

         "10. I find that in the light  of  the  factors  to  which  I  have
             referred which have been identified that dependency  has  come
             into existence in the circumstances of this case.  I find that
             family life is therefore led on that footing."

24. It is well established that in order for Article 8(1) to be engaged  on
    the basis of family life, between an  adult  child  and  his  surviving
    parent or other siblings, something more must  exist  than  the  normal
    emotional ties.  This was held to be the case in Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 31.  More recently the Upper Tribunal in Ghising [2012] UKUT  00160
    indicated that Kugathas may have been interpreted too restrictively  in
    the past and ought to be read in the light of subsequent  decisions  of
    the domestic and Strasbourg courts (paragraph 56).  The Upper  Tribunal
    stated in paragraph 62 that rather than applying a  blanket  rule  with
    regard to adult children, each case  should  be  analysed  on  its  own
    facts, to decide whether or not family life exists within  the  meaning
    of Article 8(1).



25. Therefore each case is fact sensitive.  I do not,  however,  find  that
    the FTT has adequately explained the  conclusion  that  a  family  life
    exists between the Appellant and  her  elderly  mother.   There  is  no
    finding that family life exists between the Claimant and her two  adult
    siblings.

26. There was no evidence before the FTT that the Claimant and  her  mother
    had lived together in  recent  times.   Both  had  lived  in  different
    countries for a very considerable number of years.  Evidence  indicated
    that they had each formed their own family lives, the Claimant's mother
    in the United Kingdom, and the Claimant in Pakistan.  The Claimant  had
    only visited the United Kingdom once in the last ten  years,  according
    to her application form, and there was no evidence to indicate when  if
    at all, the Claimant's mother had visited Pakistan.

27. This is not a case where  the  Claimant  is  a  young  adult,  who  has
    recently left her mother's home, as the Claimant was 60 years of age at
    the date of refusal of entry clearance.

28. I do not find that the FTT had identified  factors  in  paragraphs  7-9
    which indicated that family life exists between the  Claimant  and  her
    mother.  In those paragraphs the FTT set out  the  Claimant's  mother's
    medical condition and reference is made to the Claimant being unable to
    visit the United Kingdom until after the death of her father and  there
    is reference to the contention that the relationship  is  a  close  one
    between the Claimant and her mother.  These factors do  not  adequately
    explain why the FTT decided that there exists dependency over and above
    the normal emotional ties.

29. There is a lack of evidence to indicate that the Appellant is dependent
    upon her mother, or that her mother is dependant  upon  her.   Evidence
    indicates that the Appellant's mother has been dependent upon  her  two
    adult children in the United Kingdom.

30. I therefore conclude that the FTT erred in law in failing to take  into
    account that for family life to be engaged between an adult  child  and
    surviving parent, there must be dependency over and  above  the  normal
    emotional ties.

31. I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  FTT.   I  have  carefully
    considered all of the evidence that was before the  FTT,  and  conclude
    that  in  the  absence  of  satisfactory  evidence,  it  has  not  been
    established that there is dependency between either  the  Claimant  and
    her adult siblings, or the  Claimant  and  her  mother.   There  is  no
    dependency over and above the normal emotional ties, and therefore  the
    Claimant has not established that Article 8 is engaged  either  on  the
    basis of family or private life.

32. As Article 8 is not engaged, the Claimant's appeal cannot succeed,  and
    it is not necessary to go on and consider the issue of proportionality.

33. I have considerable sympathy for the Claimant who wishes to  visit  her
    mother in the United Kingdom, and  it  is  clear  that  her  mother  is
    elderly and has health difficulties.  However the appropriate course of
    action, in my view, would be to submit a further application for  entry
    clearance and supply sufficient evidence  to  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It is on record that the Claimant visited  the  United  Kingdom
    following the death of her father  and  returned  to  Pakistan.   I  am
    afraid that in this case, it is my view that Article 8 cannot  be  used
    to assist the Claimant.  It is not contended that the  Claimant  is  an
    E.E.A. national or the family member of an E.E.A. national.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the Claimant's appeal on  human  rights
grounds.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been  no  request  to
the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and I make no anonymity direction.






Signed                              Date 13th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 13th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
