
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01650/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 January 2016                   |On 29 January 2016                   |
|Extempore                            |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                           THIRUMARAN SELLATHURAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss L Turnbull, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent in this case, the Entry Clearance Officer, appeals  with
    permission against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callender-Smith promulgated on  3  August  2015.   That  appeal  was  a
    decision of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  refuse  Mr  Thirumaran
    Sellathurai (to whom I refer as the  claimant)  entry  clearance  as  a
    family visitor in order to visit his brother who lives  ands  works  in
    the  United  Kingdom,  as  he  was  not  satisfied  that  he  met   the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The matter first came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  5  February
    2015. The Judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules which he
    should not have done, there being no jurisdiction to do so.  Permission
    to appeal that decision was granted to the  Entry  Clearnance  officer.
    In a decision by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard promulgated on 3
    June  2015,  that  appeal  was  allowed.  The  findings  of  fact  were
    nonetheless preserved and the matter was remitted  to  Judge  Callender
    Smith again to make a further decision on Article 8.

 3. In his second decision which gave rise to this appeal, Judge  Callender
    Smith directed himself as to the five steps to be  undertaken  in  line
    with the decision  in  Razgar  and  concluded  that  all  of  the  five
    questions fell to be answered positively.  He  found  that  family  and
    private life were engaged;  that  there  was  a  sufficient  degree  of
    gravity in this case and, ultimately, that it would  on  the  facts  of
    this case be disproportionate to refuse entry clearance.

 4. The thrust of the Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal are that the judge misdirected himself in  law  in  that
    within the meaning of Article 8 family life  will  not  normally  exist
    between adult siblings in which case Article 8 would not be engaged and
    that there had in this case been no proper findings as to family life.

 5. When the matter came before me  Miss  Willocks-Briscoe  for  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer submitted that it was clear that  on  this  case  the
    judge had simply failed to make any findings with  respect  to  whether
    family life existed or  not  and  that  accordingly  the  decision  was
    flawed.

 6. Miss Turnbull for the claimant submits that in this case  it  had  been
    open to the judge to conclude that family life did exist in  this  case
    given the particular circumstances in which the claimant was living  in
    Sri Lanka, where he has significant caring  responsibilities  both  for
    the sponsor and his mother and also looking after a younger brother.

 7. It is submitted that although  there  is  no  indication  of  financial
    dependency in this  case  that  there  is  clear  emotional  dependency
    between the brothers and on that basis the principles set  out  in  the
    decision in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 are met.

 8. I consider, having looked at both decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal
    that there is no indication that the judge turned his mind  as  to  the
    question of  whether  there  was  family  life  in  this  case.  It  is
    established law that  there  is  in  the  case  of  adult  siblings  no
    presumption of family life. It was  thus  incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    consider that issue and to make findings thereon.

 9. Whilst it is implicit within  the  judge's  statement  that  there  are
    consequences of sufficient gravity to  engage  Article  8  private  and
    family life rights that he had  found  family  life  exists,  there  is
    simply no reasoning for this  and  no  findings  of  fact  which  could
    explain to the Entry Clearance Officer why it  was  that  he  concluded
    that there was, unusually in this case, family life.   Given that I  am
    satisfied that that finding was in error I am satisfied also that it is
    material because if family life is not established then  the  remainder
    of the questions identified in Razgar would not fall to  be  asked.  On
    that  basis  the   decision   that   entry   clearance   decision   was
    disproportionate cannot stand and accordingly for these  reasons  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error of law which affected  the  outcome  and  I  set  it
    aside.

10. In remaking the decision I have taken into account the evidence of  the
    sponsor who appeared before me to adopt his witness statements and also
    the declaration he had made in support of the initial  application  for
    judicial review.  He was not cross-examined.

11. The primary issue in this case is whether there has  been  family  life
    established between the sponsor and  his brother, the  respondant.   It
    is sufficiently clear from the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Kaur
    (Visit appeals Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 that the issue  of  whether
    there is family life is of significant importance.  That is referred to
    in particular at paragraph 6 where the principles set  out  in  Mustafa
    are identified in which it  is  stated  that  it  is  only  in  unusual
    circumstances that a close relative will  be  able  to  show  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance comes within the scope of Article 8(1).   In
    practical terms this is likely to be limited to cases where  there  the
    relationship is that of husband and wife, other close life partners  or
    a parent and minor child.

12. That is not to say that there cannot exist family life for the purposes
    of Article 8 between two adult siblings. That much is  clear  from  the
    Kugathas and Ghising [2012] UKUT 00161 (as approved in Gurung &  others
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8) adopting  the  characterisation  of  the  nature  of
    family life adopted by the Upper Tribunal in that case.  If the  family
    life does not exist then by definition there  can  be  no  interference
    with it and there is of course therefore no need ot consider  questions
    3, 4 and 5 as identified in Razgar and it would not be possible to make
    any finding on proportionality.

13. The evidence of the relationship between the sponsor and his brother is
    set out in the various documents which have been produced to me.  These
    are in chronological order of their creation, a statement at page 83 of
    the bundle, which is headed "Additional Information". This is  provided
    by the claimant himself and sets out his circumstances  in  Sri  Lanka.
    This is followed by an affidavit by the claimant which confirms at page
    84 his relationship to the sponsor.  That is not in dispute.

14. Further evidence is given in a declaration of sponsorship  at  page  94
    which again sets out the circumstances of the sponsor's job and  family
    in the United Kingdom.  Little is said in any of these documents  about
    any degree of dependency although it is implicit that  there  is  close
    relationship between the sponsor and his brother.  But  it  is  equally
    important to note that both of them have families of their own  and  as
    Miss Willocks Briscoe submitted, there is no  evidence  here  of  there
    being any  financial  dependency.   Further  evidence  appears  in  the
    witness statements which have been produced by the sponsor, primarily a
    statement of 4 February 2015 supplemented by  an  additional  statement
    made on 10 July 2015.

15. Again this set out the circumstances of when and how they live  and  it
    is explained that the claimant looks after the family  home.   He  runs
    his own business and cares for his mother and for the  younger  brother
    who has Down's Syndrome.  It is  said  at  paragraph  6  of  the  first
    statement that the sponsor has a particularly  good  relationship  with
    his brother who is said to  be  a  successful  businessman  and  has  a
    comfortable and fulfilling life.

16. The explanation for the visit is that the sponsor wishes his brother to
    come and see him in the United Kingdom and it is said further that this
    is because he feels he owes him  this  and  also  that  there  are  now
    significant difficulties in him continuing the visits he has until  now
    made on a regular basis of roughly twice a year since 2002.

17. I have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  evidence  that  there  is  a  close
    relationship  between  the  claimant  and  his  brother.   It  is  also
    unchallenged that the sponsor's daughter has been badly affected by the
    decision but I do not consider that any of this evidence comes anywhere
    near establishing that there is  unusually  in  these  circumstances  a
    family life between the appellant and the sponsor that exists  for  the
    purposes of Article 8.  That is not to say they do  not  have  a  close
    bond, merely that it does not meet the necessary requirements to engage
    Article 8.

18. My reasons for this are that both adults are clearly capable of running
    their own lives, both are successful in their own right  and  whilst  I
    accept that they share responsibility for their elderly  mother  and  a
    younger brother who has Down's Syndrome, that  does  not  indicate  any
    degree of the necessary dependency that  there  would  need  to  be  to
    establish unusually in these circumstances a family life.

19. It is not suggested that there is any financial interdependency  and  I
    am not satisfied either on the evidence before me  that  there  is  any
    significant emotional dependency between the  two.   Insofar  as  their
    relationship with the mother is concerned, this would appear to be that
    both of them share responsibilities to the mother but that does not  in
    my view indicate or show to the necessary standard  that  they  have  a
    family life together with.

20. Taking the evidence as a whole, I am not satisfied  that  it  has  been
    shown that the claimant has established a family life with his brother.
     It therefore follows that there being no family life it  is  difficult
    to see how it could be said that Article  8(1)  of  the  Convention  is
    engaged and I am not satisfied on the particular  facts  of  this  case
    that it is so engaged.

21. On that basis it is unnecessary for  me  to  consider  the  matter  any
    further and in terms of the Razgar question it is unnecessary for me to
    answer questions 2 to 5.   Further, and in any event, even were I wrong
    in that matter I am not  satisfied  that  any  interference  given  the
    nature of the relationship which exists between two brothers  who  have
    equally established themselves properly in business who continue  their
    relationship by means other than visits through  other  communications,
    that the interference is of sufficient gravity to engage the Convention
    in any event.

22. Accordingly I find that the claimant has  not  satisfied  me  that  the
    decision to refuse entry clearance  wasin  breach  of  his  obligations
    pursuant to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  and  I  therefore
    dismiss the appeal on that basis.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 27 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 27 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

