
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01232/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 28 August 2015                        |           On 04 September 2015     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                NACIRA KOUCEM
                         (ANONYMITY Order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ALGIERS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwod, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I see no need for, and do not make, an  order  restricting  reporting  of
   this case.

2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the  decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal to dismiss her appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse her entry clearance to the United Kingdom for  the  purpose  of  a
   family visit with her sister and niece.

3. The respondent's  refusal  decision  was  made  on  the  basis  that  the
   requirements  of  Paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration  Rules   were   not
   satisfied.  The appellant appealed on the only ground open to  her  which
   was that refusing her entry to the UK to visit her sister and  niece  was
   not compatible with Article 8 of the European Convention of Human  Rights
   (ECHR).

4. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clapham on  22  January
   2015.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  sponsor  (her
   sister). He found the sponsor to be a genuine witness. He heard  evidence
   about how close the sponsor is to the appellant and was "in no doubt that
   there is close bond between the sponsor in the UK and  the  appellant  in
   Algeria". He was also in no  doubt  about  the  close  bond  between  the
   appellant and her niece in the UK.

5. The  judge  found  that  although  there  was  family  life  between  the
   appellant and sponsor refusal of  entry  could  not  be  said  to  be  an
   interference with that family life. He did not consider it  necessary  to
   assess whether refusing the appellant entry to the UK  was  proportionate
   and made no such assessment.

6. The appellant appealed. The grounds  of  appeal  submit  that  the  judge
   failed to properly address Article 8. They contend that the judge did not
   recognise that the respondent's decision affected a central and  critical
   aspect of the lives of the family as a whole; he did not give  sufficient
   weight to the practical difficulties that would be faced by  the  sponsor
   and her daughter in travelling to visit the appellant; and  that  he  set
   the threshold for finding there was an interference with family  life  at
   too high a level.

7. Neither the appellant's  representative  nor  her  sponsor  attended  the
   hearing.

8. On 11 August 2015  the  appellant  requested  an  adjournment.  This  was
   refused  and  notice  of  the  refusal  with  reasons  was  sent  to  the
   appellant's  representatives.  The  notice   reminded   the   appellant's
   representatives that the appeal would proceed at 10am on 28  August  2015
   as listed.

9. I decided that it would be in the interests of justice  to  proceed  with
   the hearing despite  the  appellant's  non  attendance.  In  making  this
   decision, I had regard to Section 36 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules  and
   noted that not only had the appellant been notified of  the  hearing  but
   that it was clear from her  (unsuccessful)  application  to  adjourn  the
   hearing that she was aware of its date and time.

10. I heard submissions from Ms  Isherwood  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.
   Referring to the recent Upper Tribunal decision in Adjei (visit  visas  -
   Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC), she argued that  this  was  a  case  in
   which the protection of Article 8 was simply not applicable.

11. In Adjei, the Upper Tribunal considered the application of Article 8  in
   the context of an adult daughter applying for entry  clearance  to  visit
   her father, step mother and step siblings - a family unit with  whom  she
   had lived before they moved to  the  UK.  At  paragraph  [18]  the  Upper
   Tribunal found that the circumstances of the daughter and her  family  in
   the UK did not give rise to family life for the purpose of Article 8.  At
   paragraph [17] the Upper Tribunal in Adjei stated:

           It is a question of  fact  in  each  case,  of  course,  whether
           relationships  between  adult  relatives  disclose  sufficiently
           strong ties such as to fall within the scope of Article 8.  Ties
           between young adults who have yet to establish their own  family
           life separate from their parents may constitute family life: see
           Nasri v France  (1995)  21  EHRR  458.  But  this  claimant  has
           established her own family life in Ghana with  her  partner  and
           their daughter and  while  her  adult  siblings  in  the  United
           Kingdom have not yet done so,  it  is  established  by  Advic  v
           United Kingdom 20 EHRR CD 125 that the protection of  Article  8
           does not extend to links between adult siblings living apart for
           a long period where they were not  dependant  upon  each  other.
           There is no evidence of such dependence between  these  siblings
           or step-siblings. Finally, it is  well  established  that  there
           must be more  than  the  normal  emotional  ties  between  adult
           relatives for family life to exist for the purposes of article 8
           of the ECHR: Kugathas v IAT [2003] EWCA Civ 31.


12. I also have regard to the Upper Tribunal decision in Mostafa [2015]
    UKUT 00112 (IAC) where it was stated at paragraph [24]:

           It will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person
           other than a close relative will be able to show that the
           refusal of entry clearance comes within the scope of Article
           8(1). In practical terms this is likely to be limited to cases
           where the relationship is that of husband and wife or other
           close life partners or a parent and minor child and even then it
           will not necessarily be extended to cases where, for example,
           the proposed visit is based on a whim or will not add
           significantly to the time that the people involved spend
           together.

13. For the reasons set out below, I find that the judge has not made a
    material error of law and therefore his decision shall stand.


14. This is a case where the appellant contends that the circumstances of
    her relationship with the sponsor and the sponsor's daughter are such as
    to give rise to family life for the purposes of Article 8. However,
    there was no evidence of the sponsor being financially dependent on the
    appellant, or vice versa; and whilst the judge found there to be a close
    bond between the sisters, there was no evidence to support this bond
    being above and beyond that which one might expect between sisters and a
    niece.  The facts of this appeal, when considered in light of the recent
    decisions in Adjei and Mostafa, cannot be said to give rise to there
    being family life such that the refusal of entry clearance falls within
    the scope of Article 8. The judge erred, therefore, in finding there was
    family life. However, as the judge went on to find there was no
    interference with that family life the error was not material and
    therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should stand.

Notice of decision

15. There was not a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal.


16. The appeal is dismissed.

17. No anonymity direction is made.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |




