
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01420/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2015                       |17 July 2015                         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (BEIRUT)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS SAWSAN CHAKRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chris Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Joanne Rothwell, Counsel, instructed by Birketts
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  in
    the name of the Entry Clearance Officer (Beirut). It  is  brought  with
    the  permission  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Baker   against   a
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge T P Thorne  (hereafter  'the
    Judge') promulgated on 12 December 2014. The respondent to  the  appeal
    is Ms Sawson Chakra. To avoid confusion, we refer to her  hereafter  as
    'the Applicant' since this appeal has its origins in a Visa Application
    which she made in November 2012.



    Background

2.   The background to this appeal is uncontroversial  and  can  be  shortly
    stated. The Applicant, widowed in 1990, was born on 30 October 1957 and
    is a dual national of Syria and Lebanon, although currently residing in
    Iraq where she is employed by the Sheraton Hotel chain.

3.   The Applicant's son, Khaled Dandachi, is a  British  national,  married
    to Joanna Dandachi who is Polish. Their two children,  Chloe  (aged  4)
    and Aiden (aged 1) are both British nationals. The Applicant has worked
    full time since 1996 for Sheraton and at the time  of  the  application
    was employed as Director  of  Sales  and  Marketing  at  its  hotel  in
    Damascus. The Applicant has another son who  lives  in  Dubai  but  all
    other members of her close family live in Syria.

4.   In the past the Applicant has applied for - and been  granted  -  visit
    visas to come to the United Kingdom and spend time with her son and his
    family. She came twice in 2010, when her granddaughter Chloe was  born,
    staying for 7 and 10 days respectively and returning to Syria  on  each
    occasion. In June 2012 she made a further application for a visit visa.
    This was rejected because it was accompanied by certain copy  documents
    rather than originals. She reapplied  on  18  November  2012  and  this
    application was refused, the Entry Clearance Officer  (ECO)  not  being
    satisfied that the Applicant would return to Syria. That  decision  was
    not appealed. On 26 December 2013 she made the application which is the
    subject matter of this appeal.

5.   The stated reason for the application was in order that  the  Applicant
    might visit her grandson Aiden who was born on 19  November  2013.  The
    Applicant's son was her sponsor. The application was refused by the ECO
    because:

    i.   he was not satisfied that the Applicant  had  provided  sufficient
         evidence of her personal and financial circumstances in Syria; and

    ii.  in his assessment, the situation in Damascus  meant  that  it  was
         unlikely that the Applicant would leave the  United  Kingdom  after
         the proposed visit.

    This decision was not changed on review, the  Entry  Clearance  manager
    pointing out the Applicant's family could safely visit her in Lebanon.

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The Applicant's appeal from the ECO's refusal was heard on  5  December
    2014. The Judge records in his determination the  documentary  evidence
    which he considered. He had before him a  witness  statement  from  the
    Applicant.  Oral  evidence  was  received  from  the  Applicant's  son,
    supplementing that in his witness staement.

7.   The Judge properly recognised he could  only  consider  the  appeal  by
    reference to the European Convention on Human Rights, in particular the
    compatibility of the ECO's refusal with Article 8. The Judge determined
    that Article 8 was engaged, that there had been  an  interference  with
    the Applicant's enjoyment of that right, and that the interference  had
    been  disproportionate.  His  conclusion,  at  paragraph  53   of   the
    determination was that:

         "... in this case the prejudice to the family and private  life  of
         the [Applicant] (and the sponsor) is so serious as to amount  to  a
         breach of the fundamental right protected by Article 8."

    Accordingly, the Judge allowed the appeal.

    The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

8.   The principal ground advanced before us  on  behalf  the  Secretary  of
    State concerned the first step in  the  Judge's  analysis,  namely  his
    finding that Article 8 was engaged.  This  matter  was  dealt  with  in
    paragraph 29 of the determination where the Judge stated:

         "It is not disputed by the ECO (and  I  accept  that  it  has  been
         established) that the [Applicant] is in a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship of mother and son with the sponsor. She  is  also  the
         grandmother of his children. I therefore conclude  that  Article  8
         ECHR is engaged."

9.   At first blush, it might appear that there  was  a  concession  on  the
    part of the Secretary of State that Article 8 was engaged. However,  as
    Mr Avery drew to our attention, the concession went no further that the
    acceptance of the simple factual matters that (i)  there  was  a  blood
    relationship of mother and son between the Applicant and  the  sponsor;
    and (ii) that  the  Applicant  is  the  grandmother  of  the  sponsor's
    children.

10.  The Judge then proceeded to conclude, without further discussion,  that
    Article 8 is engaged. This conclusion was not rooted in any  concession
    on the part of the Secretary of State but is a  separate  free-standing
    finding. The difficulty, as Ms Rothwell very  fairly  accepted  in  the
    course of her submissions on behalf of  the  Applicant,  is  that  this
    paragraph of the determination is not well written and the Judge  gives
    no reasons for reaching the conclusion that Article 8  is  engaged.  Ms
    Rothwell  pointed  to  other  paragraphs  in  the  determination  where
    material might be found to justify the implicit finding that Article  8
    was engaged but realistically accepted that the lack of  any  reasoning
    or any express evidential findings on which the  conclusion  was  based
    made  the  determination  difficult  to  uphold,   particularly   where
    applicability of Article 8 lies at its very heart.

11.  In our assessment, paragraph 29 of the determination discloses a  clear
    error of law. It appears to make an assumption that whenever there is a
    relationship of parent and adult child  and/or  grandparent  and  minor
    grandchild then Article 8 is automatically  engaged.  For  the  reasons
    more fully explored and explained below, the issue of whether Article 8
    is  engaged  is  a  fact-sensitive  matter  to  be  resolved   upon   a
    consideration of all the available evidence and the  proper  inferences
    to which it gives rise.

12.  Regrettably there is nothing in  paragraph  29  (or  elsewhere  in  the
    determination) to indicate that the Judge undertook the necessary  task
    of evaluating the evidence. On the contrary, the wording  of  paragraph
    29 strongly suggests that  the  Judge  took  the  view  that  the  mere
    existence of a  grand-parental  relationship  was  sufficient,  without
    more, for Article 8 to be engaged. This clear error of law  means  that
    the determination cannot stand and must be set aside. It  is  therefore
    unnecessary for us to address any of the other grounds.

    Re-making the decision

13.  Both the Applicant and the Secretary of State were content  for  us  to
    re-make the decision. Mr Avery took the  sensible  and  pragmatic  view
    that  we  would  not  be  assisted  by  any  cross-examination  of  the
    Applicant's son.

14.  Our starting  point  in  re-making  the  decision  is  the  fundamental
    question of whether Article 8 is engaged. If the mere  existence  of  a
    grand-parental relationship is insufficient of itself to engage Article
    8, what of the corollary that a grandparental  relationship  can  never
    engage Article 8? This was the primary submission advanced on behalf of
    the Secretary of State, with the fall back position  that  even  if  it
    were capable of engaging Article 8, it did not do so in the  particular
    circumstances of this case.

15.  Mr Avery directed our attention to the judgment of Sir Stanley  Burnton
    (with which Richards and Clarke LJJ agreed) in  Singh  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 and in particular the
    discussion at paragraph 24:

         "In the case of adults, in  the  context  of  immigration  control,
         there is no legal or factual presumption as  to  the  existence  of
         absence of family life for the purposes of Article 8. I  point  out
         that the approach of the European Commission for Human Rights cited
         approvingly  in  Kugathas  did  not  include  any  requirement   of
         exceptionality. It all depends on the facts. The love and affection
         between an adult and his parents or siblings  will  not  of  itself
         justify a finding of a family life. There has to be something more.
         A young adult living with his parents  or  siblings  will  normally
         have a family life  to  be  respected  under  Article  8.  A  child
         enjoying a family life with his parents does not suddenly cease  to
         have a family life at midnight as he turns 18 years of age. On  the
         other hand, a young adult living independently of his  parents  may
         well not have a family life for the purposes of Article 8."

    Mr Avery submitted that in the  context  of  this  case  there  was  no
    suggestion of any dependency as between the Applicant and her son,  and
    in the circumstances there was nothing more than  love  and  affection.
    Thus Article 8 is not engaged. He submits that as Article 8  cannot  be
    engaged between parent and adult child, then  nor  can  it  as  between
    grandparent and grandchild  which  is  one  step  further  removed  and
    parasitic on the former.

16.  Ms Rothwell placed reliance upon the decision of the European Court  of
    Human Rights in Marckx v Belgium (1979) 2 EHRR 330. The  full  text  of
    Article 8 provides as follows:







         Right to respect for private and family life

         1.   Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         2.   There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
             exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with
             the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the
             interests of national security, public safety or the economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or
             crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

    Ms Rothwell directed us to paragraph 45 of the judgment which states:

         "In the Court's  opinion,  'family  life'  within  the  meaning  of
         Article 8, includes at least the ties between near  relatives,  for
         instance those between grandparents and grandchildren,  since  such
         relatives may play a considerable part in family life."

17.  Mindful  of  the  clear  jurisprudence  concerning  parents  and  adult
    children in this context (notably Kugathas v IAT  [2003] EWCA Civ  31),
    Ms Rothwell did not seek  to  argue  that  Article  8  was  engaged  by
    reference to the Applicant and her son who had chosen to  leave  Syria,
    to make his home in the United Kingdom and to start a family  here.  It
    was noted that the son had travelled to visit the  Applicant  but,  for
    understandable reasons, had considered it unsafe to take his  wife  and
    children with him since their last visit to Damascus  as  a  family  in
    2011. Ms Rothwell relied  solely  upon  the  relationship  between  the
    Applicant and her grandchildren.

18.  We endorse and adopt the expansive definition of Article 8 as given  in
    Marckz which includes the ties that can exist between grandparents  and
    grandchildren. We reject the suggestion that  such  a  relationship  is
    incapable of engaging  Article  8  because  it  is  derivative  upon  a
    parent/adult child relationship which does not engage it.  However,  it
    does not necessarily follow  that  the  existence  of  a  grandparental
    relationship automatically results in Article 8 being engaged. That was
    the erroneous assumption the Judge seemed  to  make  in  this  instance
    which led us to set aside his determination.  It  is  a  fact-sensitive
    issue to be determined on a case by case basis.

19.  In this particular case, the evidence of the Applicant referred to  the
    special bond between grandparents and grandchildren, the  'instant  and
    unconditional love' which she  experienced  when  she  first  held  her
    granddaughter, Chloe, in her arms and  her  distress  at  being  denied
    something similar with Aiden. She makes use of the telephone and  Skype
    to talk with them, and we note the phone records which evidence regular
    and lengthy calls, none of which is disputed. The Applicant continues:

         "I love talking to Chloe. She calls me Teta Susu and when we are on
         Skype she will hold up pictures she has drawn and show me  her  new
         toys, but nothing can really  replace  seeing  her  face  to  face,
         sitting together and reading bedtime stories or taking her to  pre-
         school. I look forward to teaching her some Lebanese  recipes  when
         she gets older and we can bake in the kitchen. Most of all  I  want
         to hold my new born grandson and meet him face to face."

20.  The son's evidence records the two short visits  of  the  Applicant  in
    2010 after Chloe's birth. He states how the Applicant had applied for a
    visit visa after the birth of her grandson, Aiden, as he and  his  wife
    believed it important for the Applicant to bond with Aiden as  she  had
    with Chloe. He explains his disappointment at the various refusals.  He
    did not consider it appropriate to take his  wife  and  children  to  a
    destination which the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  regarded  as
    unsafe. He considered but rejected travelling to a  third  country  and
    spending a few days in a hotel because it would prove very  costly  and
    was not practical with a  new  born  child.  Such  an  arrangement,  he
    indicated, would in any event fall short of the  Applicant  getting  to
    know her grandson in his own environment, for her to spend a  few  days
    in the family home, and for them to eat together and participate in all
    the ordinary activities of an extended family. Examples  are  given  of
    how the Applicant has played a meaningful part in Chloe's life,  making
    her aware of her cultural inheritance, and how this is being denied  to
    Aiden by the Applicant being unable to visit.  Whilst  they  make  very
    full use of telephone and Skype, this is  no  substitute  for  physical
    presence in the family home.

21.  We consider the Applicant to be entirely genuine and sincere.  We  have
    no reason to question the truthfulness of her son. The totality of  the
    evidence clearly indicates that the Applicant, despite  the  exigencies
    of living overseas, has developed as good and meaningful a relationship
    as is possible with her granddaughter and wishes to  achieve  the  same
    with her grandson. On the two occasions that she was  granted  a  visit
    visa in 2010, she stayed  for  precisely  the  time  allowed  and  duly
    returned to Syria.

22.   On  the  facts  of  this  case  the  Applicant  has  demonstrated  her
    willingness to  play  as  significant  a  part  in  the  lives  of  her
    grandchildren as is possible. This has included, so  far  as  Chloe  is
    concerned, two short visits to the family home where she engaged in the
    various mundane pleasures of being a grandmother. We are satisfied that
    she would have done the same in relation to  Aiden  had  not  her  visa
    applications been repeatedly refused. Mr Avery, quite properly, did not
    seek to argue that Article 8 was not engaged in relation  to  Aiden  on
    the basis that there had been no contact between him and the Applicant.
    That would have  been  highly  unattractive  since  the  Applicant  has
    consistently sought such contact only to be frustrated by  refusals  by
    successive ECOs, the last of  which  is  the  subject  of  the  present
    appeal.

23.  In our assessment of all the  evidence  available  to  us,  this  is  a
    situation where the composite right under  Article  8  to  respect  for
    private and family  life  is  engaged.  For  present  purposes,  it  is
    unnecessary  to  differentiate  between  the  'private'  and   'family'
    elements.

23.  It is also clear that the Article 8 right  has  been  interfered  with.
    The refusal of a visa effectively prevents the  Applicant  from  having
    anything other than telephone/Skype contact with her grandchildren.  We
    accept, as the Judge did, that it is not practical for the  Applicant's
    son, daughter-in-law and grandchildren to travel to Lebanon,  Syria  or
    Iraq. We further consider  that  the  artificiality  of  encounters  in
    hotels falls short of the appropriate level of respect for private  and
    family life which ought to extend to living  in  the  family  home  and
    sharing in the domestic routine of grandchildren in an environment with
    which they are familiar amongst their own possessions.

24.  That then brings us to the delicate matter of proportionality on  which
    we received focussed and helpful submissions from both Mr Avery and  Ms
    Rothwell.   The tipping point in this balancing exercise is whether the
    interference is 'necessary in a democratic  society',  there  being  no
    dispute that the ECO's decision was in pursuance of  a  legitimate  aim
    and in accordance with the law.

25.  There are a number of parallels between the facts of  this  appeal  and
    those in the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in Mostafa  (Article
    8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC), where it was made  plain
    that ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules was not the  question  to
    be  determined  but  is  capable  of  being  a  weighty,   though   not
    determinative,  factor  when   deciding   whether   such   refusal   is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.

26.  The proportionality question only falls to be addressed because of  our
    prior finding, on the evidence, that the ECO's refusal amounted  to  an
    interference with the Applicant's Article 8  right.  Had  we  concluded
    that there was no interference,  it  would  have  been  unnecessary  to
    proceed to consider proportionality. Thus, for example, in Adjei (visit
    visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00261 (IAC), it was found on  the  facts
    that  the  relationship  between  the  adult  claimant  and  her  adult
    relatives (father, step-mother and  step  siblings)  did  not  disclose
    sufficiently strong ties so as to fall within the scope of  Article  8.
    Accordingly  in  that  case  because  the  human  rights   ground   was
    unarguable, the proportionality assessment was not reached.

27.  In this matter, notwithstanding the refusal of  the  ECO  to  authorise
    the issue of a visit visa, the Judge  made  the  following  finding  at
    paragraph 42 of his determination:

         "Bearing in mind all the evidence, (for the reasons given below)  I
         conclude that the [Applicant] has established  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities that at the time the ECO took the decision (and now),
         she was genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for the limited period
         specified and that she intended to leave the United Kingdom at  the
         end of the proposed visit."

    We have no basis for reaching any other conclusion. It was  not  argued
    by Mr Avery that we should. We therefore proceed on the basis that  the
    Applicant satisfied the substantive  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. It is unnecessary to rehearse the factors which led the Judge to
    this conclusion. They are fully set out in paragraphs 43 to 46  of  his
    determination and  include  the  financial  matters  about  which  some
    concerns had been expressed  by  the  ECO  in  relation  to  supporting
    documentation.

28.  It is for the  Secretary  of  State  therefore  to  justify  the  ECO's
    interference with the Applicant's Article 8 right and satisfy  us  that
    it is proportionate. Looking at the matter in the round, we can see  no
    justification for the interference nor are  we  satisfied  that  it  is
    proportionate. We can detect no lack of candour by the Applicant or her
    son as sponsor. They strike us, as the Judge  evidently  found,  to  be
    entirely genuine individuals. In this instance, the  finding  that  the
    Applicant satisfies the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  a
    particularly weighty consideration. The Applicant  has  an  established
    life overseas and is currently in full time employment in Iraq. She has
    visited the United Kingdom in the past and did so on two  occasions  in
    2010 for the purpose of visiting her new  granddaughter.  She  did  not
    outstay her visa  but  left  as  required  with  her  son  meeting  his
    obligations as sponsor. There is no reason to  suspect  that  the  same
    will not be the case in relation to  the  proposed  visit  to  see  her
    grandson who will reach his second birthday this November.

29.   In  all  the  circumstances,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Applicant
    satisfies the Immigration Rules  and  neither  she  nor  her  son  (qua
    sponsor) have acted in a  way  which  might  undermine  the  system  of
    immigration control. On the particular facts as we have found them, the
    refusal of entry clearance infringes Article 8 and is disproportionate.

    Notice of Decision

    We allow this appeal to the extent that we set aside  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. We substitute our own decision  which,  albeit
    for differently expressed reasons, allows the appeal from  the  ECO  on
    human rights grounds. We make a direction that  Entry  Clearance  as  a
    visitor be granted to the Applicant, Sawson Chakra.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Mark Hill QC                         |                                     |
|Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal   |Dated    17 July 2015                |

