
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02795/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 June 2015                               |On 25 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                              Mrs Nabila iqbal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala - Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                      Delivered orally on 10 June 2015


Introduction

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  4  February  1977.
    Neither her legal representatives, her sponsor, nor  any  other  family
    member attended before the Upper Tribunal on  the  appellant's  behalf.
    We have been provided with no explanation as to why that  is  so.   The
    Upper Tribunal received an adjournment application on the day prior  to
    the hearing indicating that the sponsor was not available to appear  at
    the hearing. There was no reference to the inability of the appellant's
    legal representatives to attend the hearing.  Judge  Kopieczek  refused
    this application for three reasons:

      i) there was no explanation  as  to  why  the  sponsor  had  travelled
         outside the United Kingdom knowing  that  the  appeal  hearing  was
         pending ;

     ii) that the application for an adjournment was made  at  a  late  hour
         without satisfactory explanation and; most significantly,

    iii) the Upper Tribunal has not yet made a  decision  on  the  issue  of
         whether to set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  -
         there being no necessity to hear  further evidence from the sponsor
         at this stage of the proceedings.

 2. That refusal was communicated to the appellant's solicitors on the  day
    prior to the hearing.  Whether they received that response or  not,  it
    was their duty to attend the hearing today.  There has been no  further
    application for an adjournment.

 3. In all the circumstances, having  taken  into  account  the  overriding
    objective in the 2008 Procedure Rules, it is our conclusion that it  is
    appropriate  to  proceed  to   determine   this   appeal   absent   any
    representation on behalf of the appellant.

Error of Law

 4. It  is  prudent  first  to  briefly  set  out  the  appellant's  family
    circumstances.  The appellant was married to  a  Mr  Ahmed,  a  British
    citizen, in an Islamic ceremony in November 2009.   Mr  Ahmed  is  also
    married to Mrs Ahmed, a British citizen; that marriage taking place, as
    far as we can understand from the papers, as long  ago  as  1996.  This
    relationship is continuing.

 5. The appellant and Mr Ahmed had two children together as of the date  of
    the entry clearance officer's decision and those children  are  British
    citizens.  There is now a third child of the relationship, the birth of
    this child post-dating the decision under challenge.  Mr Ahmed also has
    four children with his British citizen wife, Mrs  Ahmed.  He  currently
    resides with Mrs Ahmed in the United Kingdom, making visits to Pakistan
    to see the appellant and his children there.

 6. On 21 April 2014 the appellant applied for entry clearance as a  family
    visitor, making reference to Article 8 ECHR at  the  same  time.   This
    application was refused in a  decision  of  11  May  2014  pursuant  to
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant lodged an  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal,  such  appeal  being  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Veloso  on  13  January  2015.  Having  heard  detailed
    submissions  from  the  parties  Judge  Veloso   concluded   that   the
    appellant's appeal was  to  be  limited  to  human  rights  grounds,  a
    conclusion which has not been the  subject  of  challenge  before  this
    Tribunal, and she thereafter dismissed the appeal  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 26 January 2015.

 7. When doing so the judge provided the following reasons in paragraphs 28
    to 31 of her determination:

         "28. I find that the appellant has established a family  life  with
             the sponsor, who is the father of  her  three  children.   The
             respondent does not dispute that the appellant and the sponsor
             have two (now three) children together.  The couple  underwent
             an Islamic marriage in 2009 and have  been  living  separately
             since, interspaced by visits  from  the  sponsor.   Mrs  Ahmed
             stated in evidence that she  has  travelled  to  Pakistan  and
             visited the appellant many times; her last two trips  were  in
             2009 and 2010.  On  at  least  her  last  visit  in  2010  she
             travelled accompanied by her children.

         29.  On balance I am not satisfied that the  respondent's  decision
             has consequences of such  gravity  as  potentially  to  engage
             Article 8.  The appellant is the sponsor's second  wife.   The
             sponsor is  living  with  his  first  wife,  Mrs  Ahmed.   The
             appellant's grounds of appeal argue  that  she  is  living  in
             Pakistan and has no intention to come to the United Kingdom to
             permanently live in the United Kingdom because she is  settled
             in her home country, where she  has  a  house,  a  servant,  a
             driver and job opportunities should she chose  to  take  these
             up.  She merely wants to come and visit.  I find that there is
             no reason the sponsor could not travel to  Pakistan  to  visit
             her, which is what he has been doing since  2009  and  was  in
             fact the reason for his absence  in  Court  today.   The  same
             applies to Mrs Ahmed and the children.

         30.  With regards to the appellant's two  (now  three)  children  I
             find that as British citizens (anticipated to  be  granted  to
             the third child) they have  the  right  to  enter  the  United
             Kingdom as they wish.  They are able to see their  step-family
             by being accompanied by their father,  the  sponsor,  who  can
             travel to Pakistan where he is presently staying and can being
             them back to the United Kingdom.  The step-family can  equally
             travel to Pakistan to visit them there.

         31.  Having found against the appellant in answer to  question  two
             of Razgar, I do not need to  consider  the  remainder  of  the
             test."

 8. Designated Judge Zucker granted the appellant permission to appeal in a
    decision of 15 April 2015, reference being made in  particular  to  the
    decision of this Tribunal in Mostafa (Article 8 entry clearance) [2015]
    UKUT 112 (IAC).

 9. The appellant's grounds can be summarised in the following terms:

                i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to consider  the
                   circumstances of the appellant's  husband,  both  in  the
                   United Kingdom and in Pakistan;

               ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to take into  account  the
                   fact that (a) the appellant has had three children  since
                   her husband's UK based family last visited  Pakistan  and
                   (b) the cost of the tickets for  the  family  of  six  to
                   travel to  Pakistan  would  be  very  expensive  and  not
                   affordable;

              iii) The First-tier Tribunal came to an  incorrect  conclusion
                   on the evidence presented in support of  the  appeal  and
                   any other judge would have found it proportionate for the
                   appellant to be allowed to travel to the  United  Kingdom
                   as a visitor;

               iv) The First-tier  Tribunal  was  wrong  in  suggesting  the
                   appellant's children could travel to the  United  Kingdom
                   with the appellant as they were British citizens; and,

                v)  The  First-tier  Tribunal   failed   to   consider   the
                   circumstances of the case in  its  entirety  and  another
                   judge would have allowed the appeal.

10. The first, second and fourth of these grounds amount to  no  more  than
    disagreement with findings of fact made by the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    paragraphs 28 to 30 of its determination, which we have set out  above.
    The Tribunal, having given careful consideration to the evidence before
    it, concluded that there was no reason why the appellant's husband  and
    indeed his UK based wife and children could  not,  if  they  so  chose,
    travel to see the appellant and her children in Pakistan.   These  were
    conclusions which the Tribunal was plainly entitled to  come  to  given
    the evidence before it.

11. In coming to such conclusions the Tribunal clearly had in mind both the
    costs of the flights (paragraph 12 of the determination) and  the  fact
    that the appellant now has three children in Pakistan (paragraph 28  of
    the determination).

12. The third and fifth of the aforementioned grounds of appeal  relate  to
    the issue of proportionality - as indeed  does  the  reference  to  the
    decision in Mostafa in the grant of permission.

13. The First-tier Tribunal did not consider the issue  of  proportionality
    because it found Article 8 was not engaged.  There is no legal error in
    the taking of such an approach - a conclusion reinforced by the  recent
    decision of this Tribunal in Adjei (visit visas  -  article  8)  [2015]
    UKUT  00261  (IAC).   In  such  circumstances  it  is  clear  that  the
    aforementioned grounds are without merit.

14. In summary, we find that when the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    is read as a whole both its findings of fact and  its  conclusion  that
    Article 8 is not engaged, were open to it on the available evidence. It
    did not fail to pay regard to any material piece of evidence,  nor  did
    it take into account any irrelevancies. The reasons it  gives  for  its
    conclusions are sufficient to allow the appellant to understand why the
    appeal was dismissed.

15. We are led, therefore, to the inevitable conclusion that the First-tier
    Tribunal's determination does not contain an error of  law  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal and for this reason we dismiss  the
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

16. On a final note, we observe that in our view, given all  that  we  have
    read, it is plain that as  of  the  date  of  the  ECO's  decision  the
    appellant did in fact meet the requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This conclusion though is not a matter which is  of
    relevance to our decision  on  the  issue  of  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination contains an error of law. For the reasons  set
    out above, we find that it  does  not  and  it  must  therefore  remain
    standing.


Notice of Decision

The   appellant's   appeal   is   dismissed.   The   First-tier   Tribunal's
determination does not contain an  error  on  a  point  of  law  capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and it is to remain standing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 12 June 2015
















