
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02999/2013
     VA/03079/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd April 2014                               |On 3rd April 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                           MISS IMAN FATIMA HASHMI
                      Master Muhammad Ali Moeez Hashmi
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Not Represented
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent appeals to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  against
    the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  S  J  Clarke)
    promulgated on 14th November 2013 by which it allowed  the  Appellants'
    appeals against Entry Clearance Officer's decision to  refuse  them  to
    leave to enter as family visitors.

 2. The Appellants had made the visa application with their mother  with  a
    view to visiting their mother's sister in the UK.

 3. All three were refused.  All three lodged notices  of  appeal  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowed all  three.   However  the  two  Appellants
    above, being outwith the permitted relationship  with  the  Sponsor  to
    grant a full right of appeal; had only a limited right of  appeal  upon
    grounds, which were not raised.  Thus the First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to determine their appeals and in doing so made a material
    error of law.  I set aside the determination in so far as it relates to
    these  two  Appellants  and  remake  it  dismissing  it  for  want   of
    jurisdiction.

 4. The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




Signed                              Date 2nd April 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
