
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02610/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th September 2014                          |On 26th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              mrs Shuvayi gwafa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer, pretoria


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Nwaiwu (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Borsada promulgated on 1st  May  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 22nd April 2014.   In  the  determination,
    the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  Shuvayi  Gwafa.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, she is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  She was  born
    on 26th January 1947.  She appeals against the decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Pretoria rejecting her  application  for  a  visit
    visa to come to the UK to see her family (the Sponsor daughter and  her
    son), dated 28th November 2012.  The applicable Immigration  Rules  are
    paragraphs 41 and 320(7A) of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she had come to the  UK  many  times  and
    returned back to South Africa without ever infringing  the  Immigration
    Rules.  She has a stable financial  situation.   She  has  good  family
    reasons for returning.  In the application for a  visit  visa  she  had
    failed to mention a previous application for leave to remain in the  UK
    which was rejected.  This was a mistake.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge,  who  heard  submissions  from  the  Appellant's  sponsoring
    daughter, Jessica Gwafa, determined that he was satisfied

         "That the witnesses could be regarded as truthful in that they gave
         clear and consistent evidence that contained no  discrepancies  and
         they were prepared to accept errors that were made in  the  process
         of drafting  the  application  which  was  also  to  their  credit"
         (paragraph 7).

 5. The judge also observed that the Appellant herself had  a  "good  track
    record which is to be commended" (paragraph  8).   However,  there  had
    been failure  to  mention  an  application  in  2009/2010.   The  judge
    observed that,

         "The Sponsor has conceded that a mistake was made and there  was  a
         failure to mention this.  I am satisfied that this was  a  material
         fact and that it was not disclosed.  I am not satisfied that  there
         was a false representation and instead  I  accept  that  it  was  a
         simple mistake and nothing more" (paragraph 10).


 6. The judge, nevertheless, held that the  mandatory  requirement  of  the
    Immigration Rules, even if there was an honest  mistake,  was  that  an
    application in these circumstances should be dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that, given that judge had found  that
    there was no dishonesty or deception involved, the appeal  should  have
    been allowed on the basis that this was simply a  mistake  and  nothing
    more.

 8. On 25th June 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

 9. On 2nd July 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered.

Submissions

10.  At  the  hearing  before  me  on  19th  September  2014,  Mr   Nwaiwu,
    representing the Appellant, relied upon the Grounds of Appeal.

11. For his part, Mr Richard stated that, even if the judge  had  erred  in
    holding that a simple mistake would lead to a  mandatory  refusal,  the
    question was where this led us.  He submitted that there were still  no
    findings in relation to the Appellant's intentions.   Given  that  this
    was the case, if I were to set aside  the  decision  of  the  judge,  I
    should remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal so that proper findings
    can be made by a First-tier Tribunal Judge about the  Appellant's  true
    intentions.

12. In reply, Mr Nwaiwu submitted that this was  not  a  case  where  under
    practice statement 7.1 and 7.3, the matter should be remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  This is because adequate findings of fact had
    been made.  With respect to the Appellant's  true  intentions,  it  was
    clear, as the judge found, that the evidence was that,

         "The Sponsor confirmed that the Appellant had returned to  Zimbabwe
         voluntarily in 2010 because her son had died leaving  two  orphaned
         children (the children's mother had  also  died).   Those  children
         were still under the age of 18 and the  Appellant  was  responsible
         for looking after them such that  she  could  not  stay  away  from
         Zimbabwe for very long" (see paragraph 5(iii)).

    In the circumstances, there existed evidence before  this  Tribunal  to
    enable it to remake the decision.

Error of Law and Remaking the Decision

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  As  the  judge  granting  permission
    observed, the Court of Appeal has established in  AA  (Nigeria)  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 773 that  "dishonesty  or  deception  is  needed,  albeit  not
    necessarily  that  of  the  applicant  himself,  to  render   a   false
    representation a ground for mandatory refusal" (see paragraph 76).

14. This means that given that the judge had held that this was a  case  of
    "a simple mistake and nothing more" the  judge  was  not  entitled,  by
    virtue of that fact alone, to dismiss the appeal.   I  accordingly  set
    aside the decision.

15. In remaking the decision, I have had regard  to  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal for the simple reason that
    there  was  evidence  before  the  judge  going  to   the   Appellant's
    intentions.

16. At paragraph 5(iii) the judge heard evidence that the  Appellant  would
    have to return to the two orphaned children of her son who  were  under
    the age of 18, and for whom  she  had  responsibility,  and  the  judge
    accepted this evidence before him.

17. Given that the evidence has been accepted, and given that the Appellant
    has hitherto had a good immigration  track  record,  I  find  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of HC 395 are satisfied.

18. The Appellant will note that this appeal is being allowed  specifically
    in recognition of  the  fact  that  she  has  maintained  a  very  good
    immigration track record.

19. Should that record be jeopardised in future by either  her  actions  or
    the actions of others it will imperil all future applications that  she
    is likely to make.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

21. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th September 2014
