

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
VA/02709/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 21 October 2013                          |On 22 October 2013        |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                    Mrs Mary Antonette Bernadette Perera
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                   Colombo

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before us following the grant of permission on
      9 September  2013  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  in
      respect of the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Snape  who
      dismissed, on  paper,  the  appeal  of  the  appellant  by  way  of  a
      determination promulgated on 24 July 2013.

   2.       The appellant is a Sri Lanka, national born on 27 February 1945.
      She appeals against the decision of the respondent to refuse her entry
      clearance to visit her adult children for a period of three weeks.

   3.       The appeal was dismissed by the judge who did  not  believe  the
      appellant's intentions were as claimed bearing in  mind  her  lack  of
      income and assets and the fact that she  had  previously  applied  for
      settlement.

   4.       The grounds argue that the judge did not have regard to all  the
      evidence and erred when she found the  appellant  had  no  assets,  it
      being said that documentary evidence of property had been included  in
      the bundle before the Tribunal. Permission was granted on  that  basis
      and arguably because the judge had used the wrong  standard  of  proof
      referring  to  "not  being  convinced"  in   paragraph   12   of   her
      determination.

Appeal hearing

   5.       The appellant's  daughter  attended  the  hearing  and  I  heard
      submissions from the parties. Mr Miah expanded upon  the  grounds  and
      submitted that the appellant had made six previous visits to  the  UK,
      had never breached her conditions and that having lost her  settlement
      application and appeal (made  in  Sri  Lanka)  she  simply  wanted  to
      continue her visits to her children. The judge had  erred  in  finding
      she had no assets (which had been referred to in the decision by Judge
      O'Flynn in the settlement appeal) and had used a higher standard  when
      reaching her conclusions. In response, Ms Pal submitted that the judge
      gad properly considered the evidence and was entitled to find that the
      settlement application cast doubt upon her intentions. Mr Miah replied
      briefly to say that the appellant had always abided by the  rules  and
      whilst she might prefer to live here there was nothing to suggest  she
      would do so unlawfully.

       Findings and Conclusions

   6.       At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated  that  I  would  be
      setting aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  remitting
      the appeal back to that Tribunal for hearing afresh.  I  now  give  my
      reasons for doing so.

   7.       I would state at the  outset  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor
      should never have opted for a paper determination in a case like this.
      It meant that the judge had no opportunity to assess oral evidence and
      to seek clarification as to the appellant's  intentions  and  why  her
      claim to now only  be  a  visitor  should  be  accepted.  That  aside,
      however, there was a bundle of evidence before the judge which has not
      been properly considered. That bundle contained the  determination  of
      Judge O'Flynn in the settlement case, which referred to certain assets
      and income of the appellant. The  bundle  also  contained  documentary
      evidence of property owned by the appellant in Sri Lanka. Whether this
      evidence would make any difference to the outcome  of  the  appeal  is
      another matter, as it does not appear to have  stopped  the  appellant
      from making a settlement application. However,  the  findings  of  the
      judge as contained in paragraph 12 are scant, make no reference to the
      documentary evidence and do not engage with  the  appellant's  witness
      statement or the skeleton argument. The  appeal  concerns  an  elderly
      lady whose children live in the UK. Dismissal would mean  her  chances
      of succeeding in future visit applications would be  slim  as  so  the
      matter should have been given careful attention. At  the  very  least,
      the findings and conclusions  should  have  been  made  once  all  the
      evidence was properly considered and using  the  correct  standard  of
      proof.

   8.       The appellant has now opted for an oral hearing and I anticipate
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge who has conduct of this  case  will
      want to hear evidence as to why it should now  be  accepted  that  the
      appellant will only stay three weeks given the lengthy visits she  has
      made in the past and the fact that she applied  for  settlement  as  a
      result of "suffering"  and  living  in  "bad  conditions"  (see  Judge
      O'Flynn's determination).  Whilst a  previous  settlement  application
      does not necessarily mean that the appellant cannot be  trusted  in  a
      visa application, oral  evidence  from  her  children  here  and  full
      disclosure of all her circumstances  will  be  of  assistance  to  the
      judge.

Decision

   9.       The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law. The decision is  set
      aside and shall be re-made on all issues  by  another  judge  of  that
      Tribunal.





      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      21 October 2013



