
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/02534/2015
                                                               VA/02535/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th January 2017                 |On 7 February 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ms rabya begum
                             mISs roshima begum
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Respondents:   Mr Mohammed Hasan, Solicitor
For the Appellant:     Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Appellant in this case is the Entry Clearance Officer but for  ease
    I shall continue to refer to Ms Rabya Begum and Miss Roshima  Begum  as
    the Appellants.  The Appellant's appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision to refuse entry clearance was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Macintosh at Taylor House on 29th July 2016.  The  judge
    had said he was allowing the appeal both under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.
    The Entry Clearance Officer had sought  permission  to  appeal  against
    that decision by way of grounds which in summary stated,

        "The appeal is restricted to residual grounds contained in  Section
        84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
        Act on 25th June 2013 Section 52 of the Crime and  Courts  Act  was
        commenced.  This restricted the appeal rights for  visitors  coming
        to visit family members in the UK.  The restrictions apply  to  any
        application  made  on  or  after  25th  June  2013.   The   instant
        application was made on 9th March 2015".

    The Entry Clearance Officer's grounds  had  stated  that  there  was  a
    material misdirection of law.  That was said to be  because  the  judge
    had allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  but  he  had  no
    jurisdiction to do so.  In respect  of  human  rights  grounds  it  was
    contended:

         "It is established case law that family life within the meaning  of
         Article 8 will not normally exist between adult  siblings,  parents
         and adult children.  If family life does not exist  then  generally
         Article 8 will not be engaged.  An application to come to the UK as
         a visitor  is  a  temporary  visit  of  limited  duration  and  the
         requirements that need to be met to qualify  under  the  Rules  are
         necessary for legitimate aims and are proportionate".

2.   During her submissions to me  today  Ms  Isherwood  said  there  was  a
    material error of law and she referred to various parts of the  judge's
    decision.  For example, to paragraph 18 where the judge had  said,  "In
    reaching my decision I  have  taken  into  account  all  the  available
    information in the appeal file the evidence from the  Sponsor  and  the
    submission from  the  respective  representatives".   She  referred  to
    paragraph 21 "I find that these factors are strong valid indicators  of
    the fact that the Appellant shall return to Bangladesh at  the  end  of
    their stay in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge referred at paragraph 23 to Article 8 and at  24  the
    factual matrix was as follows.  The Sponsor is  the  first  Appellant's
    eldest son.  She relies upon him to remain in regular contact with  her
    and he provides  her  with  financial  support.   His  daily  telephone
    contact is to ensure that she is taking her  daily  medication  and  to
    reassure her that he was well.  There is clearly a close  bond  between
    the Appellant and her  Sponsor  although  she  is  able  to  travel  to
    Bangladesh on occasions he is unable  to  do  so  on  a  regular  basis
    because he is self-employed and with anyone  who  is  self-employed  is
    unable to receive payment whilst  on  vacation  and  does  not  receive
    holiday pay.  I was taken to the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Adjei
    (Visit visas - Article 8) [2005] UKUT 261 (IAC), and also to the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in Pritam Kaur (Visit appeals;  Article  8)  [2015]
    UKUT 487 (IAC).  In short Ms Isherwood said she submitted on behalf  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer that the judge has taken  an  impermissible
    approach by dealing with the Immigration Rules aspect of the appeal and
    then insofar as Article 8 is concerned was to come to a leap  in  terms
    of what the options were in terms of the necessary  requirements  which
    had to be met.

3.   During his submissions Mr Hasan said that in  fact  I  needed  to  take
    into account that there was a further case not just Adjei and Kaur  but
    also the decision in Mostafa and,   I  can  summarise  his  submission,
    there appeared to  be  a  conflict  insofar  as  the  authorities  were
    concerned but that he was content to rely on  the  decision  in  Pritam
    Kaur for the way in which  this  was  to  be  resolved.   He  said  the
    starting point must be the ability to meet the requirements in  respect
    of entry clearance that judges are  not  restricted  to  consider  only
    Article 8.  A starting point is whether  or  not  applicants  meet  the
    visit visa Rules.  It was not in dispute he said that  the  appeal  had
    limited rights of appeal.

4.   He referred to paragraphs 12 and 15 of Kaur and  that  he  took  me  to
    paragraph 28 and 31 of Kaur.  Additionally he took me to  paragraph  38
    and at my invitation Mr Hasan also  dealt  with  paragraph  39  of  the
    decision in Kaur.

5.   Mr Hasan said that these two Appellants had been  granted  visit  visas
    and there was no issue in terms of  an  ability  to  maintain,  that  I
    should look at paragraphs 24 and 25 of the judge's decision and that in
    terms of the dependency it was recorded there was financial dependency.
     He said the matters were beyond normal emotional ties and that the way
    in which the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal letter had looked at the
    matter was more like an adult dependent relative  case.   However,  the
    Appellant's had only made an application to come to the UK as visitors.
     He said that there was no material error of law.

6.   Ms Isherwood in  reply  said  she  acknowledged  that  there  had  been
    previous visit visas but that was before the new restrictive rights  of
    appeal were introduced and that in any event I should look at paragraph
    39 of the decision in Kaur but even if one meets the Immigration  Rules
    Article 8 may not be sufficient.

Decision on Error of Law

7.   I find that there is a material error of law in the  judge's  decision.
    In my judgment the submissions on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer
    are correct.  The judge has taken an impermissible approach in relation
    to the way in which he dealt with the Immigration Rules.  He sought  to
    allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules when there was no basis or
    jurisdiction to enable him to do so.

8.   Then when he considered Article 8 he did  so  in  a  wholly  inadequate
    way.  His reasoning at paragraph 25 was insufficient and  erroneous  in
    law when he referred to,   "...  a  degree  of  interference  with  the
    Appellant's family life in that if she is unable to travel to  see  and
    be with her Sponsor, the frequency of which they would be able to  have
    face to face contact shall be much reduced.  I find that Article  8  is
    engaged.  I consider the interference is not in accordance with the law
    as the  Appellants  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The issue  as  to  proportionality  is  whether  the
    interference is necessary for the economic wellbeing of the country.  I
    find the decision is disproportionate given  that  the  Appellants  are
    able to meet the financial requirements".

9.   That is because the Upper Tribunal in Pritam Kaur made it  quite  clear
    at paragraph 49 "We bear in mind that ties between a parent  and  adult
    children or between a grandparent and  children  will  not  as  a  rule
    constitute family life  for  Article  8(1)  purposes  unless  there  is
    dependency over and above normal emotional ties ...".  It is not  clear
    as to whether the judge had this in mind at  all.   In  any  event  the
    Upper Tribunal in Kaur said at paragraph 41 "Regrettably we are  wholly
    unpersuaded however that the decision lacked proportionality. Like  the
    ECO  we  consider  that  the  Claimant  had  not  shown  she  met   the
    requirements of paragraph 41 to show that she intended only  a  genuine
    visit".  In my  judgment,  the  way  in  which  the  judge  dealt  with
    proportionality in the very brief way  that  he  did  at  paragraph  25
    despite having previously having dealt with the Immigration Rules shows
    that there was a material error of law.  The judge needed to set out in
    some detail what the basis for the finding of the family life was, what
    the basis of the dependency was and why for example paragraph 39 of the
    decision in Kaur could be found in favour of the Appellant.

10.  It is unfortunate that I have come to this decision because I know  the
    Sponsor has attended the hearing today.  He  has  heard  me  give  this
    judgment and I know that he and the Appellants will have  been  waiting
    for some time for the appeal to be finally concluded.  I am  sure  they
    will be disappointed with the result  which  has  followed  but  in  my
    judgment, it is quite clear that there has been a failure to apply  the
    case law.   It may well be that Appellants consider that having visited
    the United Kingdom in the past then then the previous  rules  ought  to
    have applied, but as Ms Isherwood pointed  out,  that  the  new  regime
    applied and therefore the judge erred in his approach to the case.

11.  I have considered whether this is a case which should  continue  to  be
    heard at the Upper Tribunal but having done  so,  in  my  judgment  the
    matter ought to  return  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  further
    hearing.  The favourable findings which have been made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge shall remain.   It  will  give  the  Appellants  an
    opportunity, if they seek  to  take  it  up,  to  put  forward  further
    evidence in relation to matters  which  go  to  the  required  Kugathas
    standard.

Directions

     The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing.  The
    previous favourable findings of the Judge shall stand.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal shall deal with any further directions.



Notice of Decision

The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is  allowed.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge's decision  which  had  sought  to  allow  the  appeal  based  on  the
Immigration Rules and Article 8 is therefore set aside.

The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


TO THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the Appellants' appeals and therefore there can be  no  fee
award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

