
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  VA/02537/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 21st July 2015                     |               On 29th July 2015      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                 The Entry Clearance Officer - Chennai India
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      MRS pARAMESWARY VIGNESWARAMOORTHY
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent is a  citizen  of  India.   Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant in the present proceedings is the ECO Chennai India.

 3. This is an appeal  by  the  ECO  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Shamash promulgated on 18 February  2015,  whereby  the
    judge allowed the respondent's appeal against the decision of  the  ECO
    dated 24th April 2014. The decision  by  the  ECO  was  to  refuse  the
    respondent entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor.  The
    respondent wished to come to the United Kingdom  to  see  her  son  and
    daughter, who are now settled and living in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    judge allowed the appeal on the basis of Article 8 Family Life.

 4. There was no attendance on behalf of  the  respondent.  I  checked  the
    file. Notice of hearing had been sent out to  the  respondent,  to  the
    legal representative and to the sponsor on  23  June  2015.  Notice  of
    hearing had therefore been sent in accordance with the Procedure Rules.
    I considered whether or not it was  appropriate  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the absence of a representative of  the  respondent.  I  was
    satisfied that proper notice of the hearing had  been  given  and  that
    therefore that it was appropriate to proceed with the  hearing.  I  was
    satisfied that I could decide the appeal on the  basis  of  the  papers
    lodged.

 5. The respondent's application  had  been  made  on  4  April  2014.  The
    decision by the ECO had been made on 24 April 2014. Given the  date  of
    the application and of the decision the appellant's  rights  of  appeal
    are limited to the grounds under the Race Relations Act  1976  and  the
    Human Act 1998. There is no right of appeal under the Immigration Rules
    [See section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 and section  88  A  of
    the Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002, wherein the rights of
    appeal for family visitors under the Immigration Rules were abolished].
    If the appeal does not engage grounds under  the  statutes  identified,
    there is no jurisdiction in the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal do  not  raise  issues
    under the Race Relations Act. The grounds of appeal  do  however  raise
    issues under Article 8 of the Human Rights Act. In allowing the  appeal
    Judge Shamash considered that the human right to  family  life  of  the
    respondent and her sponsors under  article  8  of  the  ECHR  would  be
    breached.

 7. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal raise two issues. The first
    is that in applying the case law of Razgar 2003 UKHL 27 the  judge  has
    wrongly found that family life as protected by Article 8 is engaged  on
    the facts. The second issue relates to the judge's approach to  Section
    117 A and B of the 2002 Act.

 8. Firstly in accordance with the case of Razgar the  burden  was  on  the
    respondent to prove that family  life  was  engaged  on  the  facts  as
    presented. In order to do that it had to be  proved  in  respect  of  a
    parent and adult children that there are elements of  dependency  going
    beyond normal emotional  times.  In  respect  of  such  dependency  the
    appellant seeks to rely upon the cases MS (Article 8 -- Family Life  --
    Dependency -- Proportionality) Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00064 and Kugathas v
    SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

 9. Paragraph 8 of MS states:-

        It is accepted that in  circumstances  where  family  life  is  put
        forward as existing between an adult child and his parents... there
        needs to be elements of dependency involving  more  than  emotional
        family ties. This  was  reaffirmed  in  Salad  [2002]  UKIAT  06698
        relying on the earlier case of Advic v the  UK  ,  Strasbourg  case
        decided in September 1995.

10.   Paragraph 25 of Kugathas states:-

        Because there is no presumption of family  life,  in  my  judgement
        family life is not established between an adult and  his  surviving
        parent or other siblings unless  something  more  exists  than  the
        normal emotional ties.

11. In respect of visit visas paragraph 20 of Kugathas states:-

        ....neither blood ties nor the concern or affection that ordinarily
        go with them are, by themselves or together in my judgement, enough
        to constitute family life. Most of us  have  close  relations  with
        whom we are extremely fond and whom we visit or who visit us,  from
        time to time; but none of us would say on those grounds alone  that
        we share a family life with them in any  sense  capable  of  coming
        within the meaning and purpose of Article 8.

12. The case of Adjie (visit visas -- Article 8) [ 2015] UKUT 261 has given
    further guidance on the issue of article 8 in respect  of  applications
    for visit visas. A number of points arise  out  in  the  decision.  The
    first is that to approach the case by seeking to establish  whether  or
    not an applicant met the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  in
    considering article 8 was legally a flawed approach to the issues.  The
    case identified that the first question to be addressed  in  an  appeal
    was whether or not human rights specifically article 8 family life  was
    engaged at  all.  Where  the  judge  has  started  by  considering  the
    requirements of the rules in such a flawed  approach  the  findings  of
    fact may carry little weight.

13. As identified in paragraphs 15 and 17 of Adjie  whether  there  is  the
    degree of  dependency  necessary  to  engage  Article  8  requires  the
    assessment of the evidence. Here much as in paragraph 17 of  Adjie  the
    sponsors have their own family  units  and  there  was  no  element  of
    dependency.

14. The fact that the appellant is a widow and is seeking to see two of her
    children in the UK and their families, does not  alter  the  fact  that
    they have their own family units and the appellant is  not  a  part  of
    that family unit  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  as  there  is  no
    dependency. The judge did not consider the issue of dependency.  As  he
    did not consider such the assessment of article 8 is legally flawed.

15. The Notice of Hearing indicated that the case could  be  re-decided  on
    the basis of the evidence presented.

16. I have considered the evidence presented and  find  that  there  is  no
    family life as protected  by  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  There  is  no
    dependency. Whilst the appellant visits her family members in  the  UK,
    there is no financial or emotional dependency. The adult offsprings  in
    the UK have their own family units separate from the appellant. In  the
    circumstances I do not find that Article 8 family life  is  engaged  on
    the facts as presented.

17. There is no private life right to visit people in the UK nor any  other
    right under the ECHR engaged on the facts as presented.

18. For the reasons given I find that there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision. I set that decision aside. I have determined to  re-
    make the decision. None of the rights under the ECHR are engaged on the
    facts as presented. Therefore there is no jurisdiction  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and no valid appeal before the Tribunal.

19. There is a material error of law in the original decision. I  set  that
    decision aside and substitute a decision dismissing the appeal for  the
    reasons set out.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


