
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02979/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                          SERGIO JR AGAPITO ALA AN
                         (ANONYMITY Order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - THE PHILIPPINES
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr O. Lot, Counsel instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting  reporting  of
    this case.

    Background

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing to grant him entry clearance for a family visit.

 3. The appellant is a national of the Philippines born on 23 October 1954.
     He applied for entry clearance in order to visit his daughter, son-in-
    law and grandchildren who live in the United Kingdom. His son-in-law is
    an Italian national. It was not clear from the papers before me whether
    the appellant's wife also lives in the UK. Mr Lot clarified  that  she,
    along  with  another  of  the  appellant's  daughters,  lives  in   the
    Philippines.

 4. The application for a family visit was refused by the respondent  in  a
    decision dated 9 May 2014 on the basis that not all the requirements of
    Paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules were satisfied.

 5. Shorty before making the application for a family visit, the  appellant
    had applied unsuccessful for admission to the UK as a family member  of
    an EEA national. In making this earlier application the  appellant  had
    informed the respondent that he  only  wished  to  visit  the  UK.  The
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was  wholly  or  mainly
    dependent on the EEA national. The refusal decision,  dated  8  January
    2014, was not appealed.

    First-tier Tribunal Decision

 6. The appeal against the decision dated 9 May 2014 was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Prior ("the judge") on 20 April  2015.   The  judge
    made clear that the appeal could only be brought on the ground that the
    refusal of entry infringed the appellant's human rights under Article 8
    of the ECHR. Having set out the  relevant  matters  to  consider  under
    Article 8, the judge dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds  on
    the basis that he was not satisfied refusal of a visit visa application
    was a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  family  life  of  the
    appellant or his family members.

 7. The Grounds of Appeal make two submissions. The first is that the judge
    failed to carry out a proper assessment under  Article  8.  The  recent
    Upper Tribunal decision in Mostafa [2015]UKUT 00112 is cited and it  is
    argued that the judge failed to make a proper finding as to whether the
    Rules were in fact satisfied by the appellant in order that this  could
    be given due weight in the proportionality assessment under Article  8.
    The second ground is that the judge ignored  the  appellant's  argument
    that refusing him entry would breach his rights as an EEA family member
    and impinge on his son-in- law's right to  free  movement.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan gave permission to appeal on all grounds.

    Submissions

 8. Mr Lot,  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  submitted  that  because  the
    appellant was proposing to visit an EEA national the judge should  have
    considered whether refusing the appellant entry would violate  the  EEA
    national's right to free  movement  and  the  exercise  of  his  Treaty
    Rights. Mr Lot acknowledged that he was unable to provide any authority
    or point to any  rule  or  statute  that  supported  his  argument  but
    nonetheless maintained it was an important matter to  which  the  court
    should have regard.

 9. With regard to Article 8 of the ECHR, Mr Lot argued that the judge  had
    not followed Mostafa as  it  was  not  discernible  from  the  decision
    whether he had determined whether Paragraph 41 of the  Rules  had  been
    satisfied. He argued that Article 8 is engaged because the appellant is
    dependent on his daughter  who  sends  him  money  regularly.  Mr  Lott
    referred to an unreported decision  which  purportedly  showed  that  a
    relationship such as that between the appellant and his daughter  would
    engage Article  8  although  he  was  unable  to  provide  a  copy  and
    acknowledged that it could not in any event be relied upon.

10. Mr Melvin argued that the EEA argument had no basis. This was an appeal
    of a decision to refuse a family visit visa, not a decision  to  refuse
    entry as a family member of an EEA national. His view on Article 8  was
    that it was simply not engaged and he referred to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Adjei [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC) which had clarified how Mostafa
    should be interpreted.

    Consideration

11. The appellant's contention that special consideration should be  given,
    or a different test applied, to a visitor visa  application  where  the
    applicant proposes to visit an EEA national is without  merit.  Mr  Lot
    was unable to provide any authority, or refer to any legislation, rule,
    guidance or other material, in support of this argument. It may be that
    confusion has arisen because the appellant made an  application  (which
    was refused) to enter the UK as a family  member  of  his  son-in-  law
    shortly before the application for entry clearance as a family visitor.
    However, the appellant did not appeal the decision refusing  him  entry
    as a family member and only appealed the decision refusing him entry as
    a visitor under Paragraph 41 of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Accordingly,
    there was not a material error in the judge's failure to  consider  the
    appellant's misconceived EEA arguments.

12. I now turn to the question of whether refusing the appellant  entry  to
    the UK would be contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR.

13. Both parties accepted that the judge  was  correct  to  recognise  that
    there is no right to appeal against refusal of  entry  clearance  in  a
    family visitor case except  on  grounds  alleging  the  decision  shows
    unlawful discrimination or is unlawful under Section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act.

14. The first question to be addressed is whether Article 8 of the ECHR  is
    engaged at all.  As stated by the Tribunal in Adjei at paragraph [9]

         "The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to
         grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights  grounds
         are available is whether Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged  at  all.
         If it is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal
         has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of
         the ECO under the rules and should not  do  so.  If  article  8  is
         engaged, the Tribunal will need to look at the extent to which  the
         claimant is said to have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
         rule  because  that  will  inform  the  proportionality   balancing
         exercise that must follow."

15. A similar point is made in Mostafa at paragraph [23] where the Tribunal
    stated that the underlying  merits  of  an  appeal  "will  only  become
    relevant if the interference is such as to engage Article 8(1) ECHR".

16. The appellant lives in the Philippines with his wife and  daughter  and
    wishes to visit his other daughter, and her family, who live in the UK.
    He receives a regular remittance from his daughter in the  UK  although
    it is far from clear he is dependent on her.  Indeed,  his  application
    for entry clearance as a family member of an EEA national  was  refused
    (in a decision that was not appealed), inter alia, on the basis that he
    did not satisfy the requirement of being dependent on his daughter  and
    her EEA national husband in  the  UK.  The  appellant's  circumstances,
    therefore, are very different to those in Mostafa, where Article 8  was
    found to be engaged, which concerned a husband  wishing  to  visit  his
    wife, and have more in common with Adjei, in which the  Tribunal  found
    Article 8 was not engaged where a daughter sought to visit  her  father
    and step family.

17. The judge found that the appellant's family were able to visit him  and
    that visits had taken place in January 2015 as well as in 2012 and that
    refusing  the  appellant  entry  would  not   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with his (or  his  family's)  family  life.   This  was  a
    finding that was clearly open to the judge for  the  reasons  he  gave.
    Indeed, based on the evidence before the judge about  the  relationship
    between the appellant and the appellant's adult daughter, it  was  open
    to  the  judge  to  find  that  Article  8  was  not  engaged  at  all.
    Accordingly, the appellant has failed to identify any material error of
    law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal and therefore the appeal  is
    dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

    Notice of Decision

18. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and its decision dismissing the appellant's  appeal  shall
    stand.

20. No anonymity direction is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan | Dated                               |


