

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: VA/02544/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 17 July 2017                           |On 17 July 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       FOLORUNSHO ADEGBOYEGA IJAODOLA
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mr Kadiri of Mitchell Simmonds Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolf promulgated on 9 January  2017,  in
        which the Judge allowed the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
        grounds against the refusal of an application for a Visit Visa.
     2. Permission was granted and the matter listed for an Initial Hearing
        at Field House for today. On 14 July 2017, Miss Isherwood wrote  to
        the Upper Tribunal and  the  respondent's  representatives  in  the
        following terms:


             "The above named appellants error in law  hearing  is  due  to
             take place on the 17 July 2017. This is  following  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer challenging the allowed  visit  Visa  appeal
             promulgated on the 9 January 2017.


             While  this  visit  Visa  appeal  was  being  pursued  to  the
             appellant submitted an application for entry  clearance  as  a
             parent of a settled child. This application  was  refused  and
             allowed on appeal by Judge Abebrses decision promulgated on 29
             June  2017.  The  Tribunal  reference  for  this   appeal   is
             HU/01924/2016. This decision has been reviewed and  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer is not going to challenge this decision.  In
             light of  this  the  challenge  to  the  visit  visa  is  made
             redundant, therefore it is requested  that  the  challenge  be
             withdrawn and the Tribunal issue a decision to that effect."



Discussion



     3. Permission granted to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  withdraw  her
        challenge to the appeal in light of which there is no extant appeal
        upon which the Upper Tribunal  is  required  to  make  a  decision.
        Accordingly, no material error of law is found in the  decision  of
        the First-tier Tribunal which shall therefore stand.


Decision

     4. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     5. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17 July 2017






