
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
VA/02230/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 October 2016                       | On 19 October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          VISA OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                AMTAL NAHEED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Akhtar (Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant was born on 20  May  1975  and  is  a  female
    citizen of Pakistan.  She applied for entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor.  Her application was refused under  paragraph  41
    of HC 395 (as amended).  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    O'Hanlon) which, in a decision promulgated on 16 February 2016, allowed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  At [10], the judge  had  found
    that the appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR should be dismissed.

 2. The judge had no jurisdiction to allow the appeal under the Immigration
    Rules.  Further, in the light of his clear findings as regards  Article
    8 ECHR, it is necessary for the Upper Tribunal to set aside the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision and to re-make  the  decision  dismissing  the
    appeal.

 3. The Upper Tribunal hearing was attended by Mr Akhtar, the  sponsor.   I
    pointed out to Mr Akhtar that it may assist the appellant in making any
    future application to the Visa Officer  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the appellant satisfied the requirements of paragraph 41  of
    HC 395.  However, I also explained to him that any  future  application
    would be determined on the circumstances of the appellant at  the  time
    of application.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  16
    February 2016 is set aside.  I remake the  decision.   The  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Visa Officer dated 3 March  2015  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 10 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


