
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02229/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th January 2017                  |On 10th May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              miss huma liaquat
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. L Turnbull, Counsel,


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blake promulgated on 28th July 2016.


 2. The appellant before me, is the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") and the
    respondent to this appeal, is Ms Huma Liaquat.  However,  for  ease  of
    reference, in the course of this decision I shall  adopt  the  parties'
    status as it was before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  shall  in  this
    decision, refer to Ms. Liaquat as the appellant  and  the  ECO  as  the
    respondent.


 3. The appellant was born  on  24th  April  1986  and  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  She applied for entry clearance as a family visitor to visit
    her mother, brother and sister in the UK.  In reaching a decision,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") noted that  the  appellant  is  single,
    with no dependants, and that she had provided no evidence of any family
    in  Pakistan.   Although  the  appellant  had  provided   evidence   of
    employment in Pakistan, the ECO was not satisfied that this alone would
    act as an incentive for her to leave the UK.  The  ECO  considered  the
    fact that as her mother, brother and sister are all resident in the UK,
    the appellant's ties to the UK  far  outweigh  her  ties  to  Pakistan.
    Overall, the ECO was not satisfied that the appellant has  sufficiently
    strong ties to Pakistan, to credibly demonstrate she will leave the  UK
    after her proposed visit. The ECO was not satisfied that the  appellant
    is seeking entry to the UK as a genuine visitor for  a  limited  period
    with the intention of leaving the  UK  at  the  end  of  the  visit  as
    required by paragraph 41 (i) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules.  It was
    that decision dated 4th March 2015, that  was  maintained  following  a
    review by the Entry Clearance Manager, that gave  rise  to  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake


 4. The background to the appellant's application and the decision  of  the
    respondent is set out at paragraph [3] to [17] of the decision  of  the
    FtT.  The Judge set out the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  at
    paragraph [18] of his decision.  At paragraphs  [19]  to  [35]  of  his
    decision, the Judge records his conduct of the appeal and the  evidence
    that he received from the appellant's sponsor, Mr Adbdul Liaquat.   The
    Judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [38] to [47]
    of his decision.


 5. The Judge found that the appellant's sponsor was a  wholly  honest  and
    credible witness.  The Judge accepted the account provided of  how  and
    when the appellant's family had travelled to the UK, and was  satisfied
    that the appellant is a qualified doctor, employed in a hospital.   The
    Judge accepted that she was in receipt of a good salary  and  that  she
    lived with a maternal uncle.  The Judge accepted that the appellant did
    have strong ties to, and  good  employment  in  Pakistan,  such  as  to
    indicate that she was very likely to return at the end  of  any  visit.
    At paragraph [43] of his decision, the Judge states:


           "I had no doubt that  the  Appellant  would  return  if  granted
           leave. I was satisfied that the Appellant's case came within the
           relevant Immigration Rules.   I found that  the  ECO's  decision
           and that of the ECM were contrary to Article 8 ECHR."

 6. At paragraph [44] of his decision, the Judge refers to the decision  of
    the President of the Tribunal in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)
    [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).  At paragraphs [46] and [47] of his  decision,
    the Judge states:


           "[ was satisfied on the basis of the evidence that the Appellant
           was genuinely seeking entry clearance as a visitor to visit  her
           family.   I found that the application was  compliant  with  the
           Rules.

           In the circumstances, I found that the decisions of the ECO  and
           ECM were not proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of  fair  and
           firm immigration control."

The appeal before me


 7. The respondent submits that the appellant has a right of appeal to  the
    Tribunal but the ground of appeal is restricted to the ground that  the
    decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  The
    respondent submits that the Judge erred in  his  consideration  of  the
    Article 8 claim.  The respondent submits that there is  no  presumption
    of family  life  between  an  adult  and  their  surviving  parents  or
    siblings.  The Judge does not consider whether there is a  family  life
    between the appellant and her family in the UK, all of whom are adults.
     The respondent submits that there is no finding  that  there  are  any
    additional ties between the appellant and her family, beyond the normal
    emotional ties and that on the evidence, there is no  family  life  for
    the purposes of Article 8. The respondent submits that even  if  family
    life were found to exist, the respondent's decision does not  interfere
    with the status  quo.  There  are  no  reasons  given  as  to  why  the
    appellant's family in the UK may not visit the appellant  in  Pakistan,
    or  maintain  contact  through   modern   methods   of   communication.
    Furthermore, the respondent submits the proportionality  assessment  is
    inadequate; it does not explain why  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    which only allows the parties to be together  temporarily,  and  for  a
    short period, is a disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights.
    The respondent submits that in allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds, the Judge has erred in law, such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Andrew on  28th  November
    2016.  The matter comes before me to consider whether the  decision  of
    the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if  so,  to
    remake the decision.


 9. Before me, Mr Tarlow adopted the respondent's grounds  of  appeal.   He
    submits that the appellant  is  an  adult  and  that  it  is  now  well
    established that where family life is put forward as  existing  between
    an adult and his or her parents and siblings, there needs to be further
    elements of dependency involving more than the usual  emotional  family
    ties. He relies upon the decisions of the Tribunal in MS (Article  8  -
    Family Life - Dependency - Proportionality) Uganda [2004]  UKIAT  00064
    and the Court of Appeal in Kugathas -v- SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  to
    support the proposition that neither blood ties, nor  the  concern  and
    affection that ordinarily go with them, are, by themselves or together,
    enough to constitute family life.   Mr Tarlow submits  that  the  judge
    failed to make any or any adequate findings as to material matters.  He
    submits that the judge failed to properly address and  explain  in  his
    decision whether Article 8 is engaged at all.


10. A written response was submitted on behalf of the appellant  under  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, and handed up to me  by
    Ms Turnbull.  The appellant  opposes  the  appellants'  appeal  and  in
    summary  the  appellant  contends  that  the  Judge  directed   himself
    appropriately, and made a decision that was properly open to him.


11. Ms Turnbull submits that the FtT Judge has given appropriate reasons in
    his decision for allowing the appeal  as  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant met all the requirements for the grant of entry clearance  as
    a family visitor, and that the decision of respondent  is  contrary  to
    Article 8.


Discussion


12. The FtT Judge states at paragraph [46] of  his  decision  that  he  was
    satisfied on  the  basis  of  the  evidence,  that  the  appellant  was
    genuinely seeking entry clearance as a visitor  to  visit  her  family.
    He found that the application was compliant with the Rules and  in  the
    circumstances, he found that the decisions of the  ECO  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager were not proportionate to the legitimate aim of  fair
    and firm immigration control.  He therefore allowed the appeal.


13. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  112  (IAC),  the
    Upper  Tribunal  held  that  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
    immigration rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal,
    but is capable of being a weighty,  though  not  determinative,  factor
    when deciding whether such refusal is proportionate to  the  legitimate
    aim  of  enforcing  immigration  control.    Only   in   very   unusual
    circumstances, likely to be limited to  relationships  of  husband  and
    wife, other close life partners, or parent  and  minor  child,  will  a
    person other than a close relative, be able to engage Article  8(1)  in
    an entry clearance case.   The  Judge  of  the  FtT  referred  to  that
    decision.


14. The task of the Judge was to determine  whether  the  decision  of  the
    respondent was unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998.   That
    is, whether the decision was incompatible with the appellant's  Article
    8 rights.  As set out in the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Adeji
    (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC), the first question  to
    be addressed in an appeal against a refusal to grant entry clearance as
    a visitor where only human rights grounds  are  available,  is  whether
    Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all.  If it is  not,  the  Tribunal
    has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision  under
    the rules and should not do so.  If Article 8 is engaged, the  Tribunal
    may need to look at the extent to which an appellant is  said  to  have
    failed to meet the requirements of the rules, because that  may  inform
    the proportionality balancing exercise that must follow.


15. The Judge makes no reference in his decision to the  leading  authority
    on Article 8 claims; R -v- SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, and  he
    does not adequately address the five  stages.   It  is  uncontroversial
    that the Tribunal must first determine whether Article 8 of the ECHR is
    engaged at all. If it is not,  the  Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction  to
    embark upon an assessment of the remaining issues identified in Razgar.
     If Article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal should have gone on to  consider
    the remaining four stages identified in Razgar.


16. In my judgement, it is clear from any reading  of  paragraphs  [43]  to
    [47] of his decision that the Judge fails to consider,  let  alone  set
    out the evidential basis upon which there might be a finding that there
    exists a family life between the appellant and her sponsor  and  family
    in the UK.   The authorities make it clear that family life  is  likely
    in this context to be limited to relationships of husband and wife, and
    other close life partners, and that only in very unusual circumstances,
    will a person other than a close relative be  able  to  engage  Article
    8(1) in an entry clearance case.


17. Furthermore, even if family life were to exist, in  my  judgement,  the
    Judge did not consider whether any interference will have  consequences
    of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of  Article  8.
    In his decision, the Judge did not consider  whether  the  family  life
    could be respected in some other way, such as  the  appellant's  family
    travelling to Pakistan, the family meeting elsewhere, or continuing  to
    maintain any family life they have, in the way currently enjoyed.


18. In my judgement, the Judge did not properly consider  the  question  of
    whether there existed a family  life  between  the  appellant  and  her
    sponsor and family in the UK.  As the Judge did not address his mind to
    the question of whether family life exists, unsurprisingly,  the  Judge
    failed to address what it is in the evidence, that establishes anything
    more than the emotional concern and affection  that  ordinarily  exists
    between an adult and their parents  and  siblings.   As  the  Court  of
    Appeal noted in Kugathas, most people have close relations of  whom  we
    are extremely fond, and whom we visit, or who visit us,  from  time  to
    time; but none of us would say on those grounds alone, that we share  a
    family life with them in any sense capable of coming within the meaning
    and purpose of Article 8.


19. There can be no presumption of a family life; it  all  depends  on  the
    facts and I am satisfied that there is an error of law in the  decision
    of the FtT Judge. It therefore falls to me to remake the Decision.


20. I have carefully considered the appellant's desire to visit the UK  for
    a 26-day period to see her mother, brother and sister,  but  that  does
    not equate to a right to do so. The appellant's  sponsor  attended  the
    hearing before the FtT but there is no evidence of the strengths of the
    relationships and any  dependency.   In  fact,  to  the  contrary,  the
    evidence was that the appellant was due to be married at the end of the
    year and she would be embarking upon her own  life  with  her  husband.
    There is no evidence before me,  or  any  explanation  as  to  why  the
    relationship that the appellant maintains with her mother, brother  and
    sister cannot continue to be maintained  by  their  visiting  Pakistan,
    such as to enable me to find that Article 8 is engaged,  and  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance will have consequences of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


21. On the evidence before the Judge, therefore, I am quite unable to  find
    that Article 8 is engaged in this case. That  disposes  of  the  appeal
    before me which therefore stands dismissed.


DECISION


22. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake is set aside.


23. I remake the decision, and the appeal is dismissed.


24. No anonymity direction is applied for, and none is made.





Signed                                  Date     28th April 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


25. I have set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  have
    remade the decision and  dismissed  the  appeal.   There  can,  in  the
    circumstances, be no fee award.





      Signed                                 Date     28th April 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




