
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02298/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 January 2014                              |On 31 January 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE pinkerton

                                   Between

                        MR SARDAR GHULAM MUSTAFA KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is  recorded
    as 21 March 1945.  He applied for entry clearance for the purpose of  a
    family visit to the United Kingdom for four  weeks.   That  application
    was refused because the respondent  was  not  satisfied  (a)  that  the
    appellant was genuinely seeking  entry  as  a  visitor  for  a  limited
    period, (b) not satisfied that the  appellant  intended  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end of the  period  of  the  visit  and  (c)  not
    satisfied that the appellant would  maintain  and  accommodate  himself
    without recourse to  public  funds.   It  was  also  doubted  that  the
    appellant could  meet  the  cost  of  the  return  or  onward  journey.
    Furthermore the respondent considered that a false document  (namely  a
    sponsorship  declaration)  had  been  produced  in   support   of   the
    application and therefore the provisions of paragraph  320(7A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules applied.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision and the matter came before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge C J Woolley.  In a determination promulgated on  13
    September 2013 the appeal was dismissed.

 3. The appellant sought permission to  appeal.   Initially  permission  to
    appeal was refused but upon a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal
    permission to appeal was granted the reasons being as follows:-

      1) The original judge found that the decision under paragraph 320  was
         not sustainable, and that the sponsor was  a  credible  and  honest
         witness.  His evidence was that the appellant had been visiting the
         UK since the 1960s and the appellant may  not  have  considered  it
         necessary to supply  all  of  the  documentation  in  view  of  his
         previous trips to the UK.  He recorded that there was  evidence  of
         his business in Pakistan.   He  dismissed  the  appeal  essentially
         because the appellant had not provided a  personal  bank  statement
         although he had provided business accounts.

      2) It is arguable that the judge reached a decision against the weight
         of the evidence.  The appeal will be listed to Field House  with  a
         time estimate of one hour.   If  an  error  of  law  is  found  the
         decision can be  remade  on  that  occasion.   The  sponsor  should
         attend.

Adjournment Request

 4. On the morning of the error of law hearing I received a message that Mr
    Sadaqat Bahir, the sponsor who appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, was unwell  and  seeking  an  adjournment.   I  considered  that
    request.  It was not made in accordance with part  4  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 because it was not made one clear
    working day before the date of the hearing.  On the assumption that the
    sponsor was taken ill at short notice -  there  has  been  no  evidence
    produced about this - then I accept that he would not be able  to  give
    such notice.  I therefore went on to consider whether  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed with the hearing without him.

 5. I considered the overriding objective which requires  that  proceedings
    before the Tribunal are handled as fairly, quickly and  efficiently  as
    possible in the interests of the parties to the proceedings and in  the
    wider public interest. I bore in  mind  in  particular  that  this  was
    (initially anyway) an error of law hearing and that there would be very
    limited scope for the sponsor on the facts as had been  found  and  the
    matters in issue to help me on the error of law point.   By  reason  of
    the already lengthy delays since the appellant had  applied  for  entry
    clearance and the reasons that he wished to come to the United  Kingdom
    as expressed in the documentation before me I  decided  that  I  should
    proceed to deal with the  error  of  law  issue  without  granting  the
    adjournment.  If I found a material error of law then the appeal should
    be relisted to enable the sponsor to give evidence.

 6. The refusal of entry clearance decision raises, amongst  other  things,
    the issue of the appellant's financial circumstances in Pakistan.   The
    comment is made that although the appellant states he has a residential
    property there and has produced account statements for the  company  in
    which he has an interest he provided no evidence of his  own  financial
    circumstances.  It was pointed out to him that the  statement  produced
    does not demonstrate his claimed income. The comment is also made  that
    the funds in the business bank statement are for  the  running  of  the
    business but do not provide satisfactory evidence  of  the  appellant's
    own financial circumstances.

 7. The notice of appeal refers to the business bank account to  which  the
    appellant has full access.   On  review  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager
    commented that he was not satisfied that the  appellant  had  addressed
    the concerns raised  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  regarding  the
    appellant's current personal and financial circumstances in Pakistan.

 8. At the hearing of the appeal the judge noted at paragraph 25  that  the
    respondent doubted the genuineness of the appellant and  his  intention
    to return after the trip.  "This is  based  on  the  lack  of  evidence
    produced to support his claimed personal and financial circumstances in
    Pakistan".  The judge then proceeds to  state  that  the  sponsor  very
    candidly and honestly said that he could not  assist  greatly  in  this
    area as he did not know about the appellant's bank  accounts  or  about
    the documentation he had sent from Pakistan.  All he could say was that
    the appellant was a wealthy man who had been visiting the UK since  the
    1960s.  He  added  that  the  appellant  may  not  have  considered  it
    necessary to supply all the documentation in view of his previous trips
    to the United Kingdom.  As to that point I note that according  to  the
    application for entry clearance  the  appellant  has  not  visited  the
    United Kingdom in the last ten years (see the response to  question  73
    of the application form) although he has visited the UK  previously  so
    that although he may have been a frequent visitor in the  past  he  has
    certainly not been in recent years.

 9. The judge went on to note that no  further  bank  statements  had  been
    produced despite the refusal letter.  At paragraph 27 he noted  further
    that the sponsor stated that in Pakistan business is considered  to  be
    the same as the person.  The judge could not  accept  that  this  ethos
    meant that the money in the  business  bank  account  is  that  of  the
    appellant and did not find that the appellant's claimed income could be
    evidenced by reference to the business account alone.  He gave  reasons
    for coming to that conclusion later in the same paragraph.   He  stated
    that it would have been an easy  matter  to  produce  a  personal  bank
    account showing receipts of income from the business but  for  whatever
    reason this had not been produced.  Similarly a profit and loss account
    could have been produced to show the  appellant's  drawings  or  profit
    share from the business but that too was absent.

10. Although finding in favour of  the  appellant  on  all  other  matters,
    including that he did not produce  any  fraudulent  documentation,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal.

11. The appellant  has  written  somewhat  indignantly  that  he  has  been
    humiliated because he is a respected member of his society who has held
    high office.  He states that he is unable to understand how  the  judge
    assumed that he is not a genuine visitor or will not leave  the  United
    Kingdom after completing the proposed visit.

12. The judge sets out at paragraph 3 of the determination that the  burden
    of proof is on the appellant to meet the requirements of the Rules  and
    the standard of proof required is the balance of probabilities.

13. Had the appellant dealt  with  the  matter  of  concern  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  and  the  judge  in
    relation  to  proof  of  the  appellant's  financial  circumstances  in
    Pakistan then on balance it seems likely  that  the  judge  would  have
    found in the appellant's favour.  As it is the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules because he did not
    produce the evidence  required  to  show  that  he  complied  with  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

My Decision

14. Having reviewed the overall position I find that the judge was entitled
    to conclude as he did for the reasons given.  There  has  been  a  full
    consideration of all the evidence before him  and  there  has  been  no
    error such that the appeal should be heard again.

15. In the circumstances the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    stands.

16. There  has  been  no  request  for  anonymity  and  in  the  particular
    circumstances of the case I see no reason or need to make an  anonymity
    direction.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


