







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02801/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                         Decision and      |
|                                  |Reasons Promulgated                        |
|On: 3 June 2015                   |                         On 17 June 2015   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - Abu dhabi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Usman Hameed Butt
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Faisal Hameed Butt, sponsor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the entry clearance officer  and  to
      the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The entry  clearance  officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
      decision of First-tier  Tribunal  C  H  O'Rourke,  promulgated  on  27
      January 2015, to allow the claimant's appeal against  the  refusal  to
      grant him entry clearance for a family visit.


   3. The claimant is a national of Pakistan, born on 7 March  1979.  He  is
      sponsored by his brother, Mr Faisal Hameed Butt.  In  his  grounds  of
      appeal, the claimant stated that the reason for seeking  entry  for  a
      limited period was '.....to visit  his  brother  and  his  family,  in
      particular, to attend his nieces birthday party' [9 iii].  The   Judge
      noted that the issue was whether the decision was lawful  pursuant  to
      s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 '.....in relation to Article 8 rights
      to a family life' [11].


   4. The entry clearance officer was not satisfied that  the  claimant  was
      genuinely seeking entry to the UK for  a  limited  period.  The  Judge
      noted  that  the  claimant  had  visited  the  UK  on  three  previous
      occasions, returning to Pakistan each  time,  albeit  that  he  stayed
      beyond the stated period of his visit on the last  occasion.   He  has
      strong bonds in Pakistan, both familial and work related.


   5. The Judge directed himself in accordance with  the  Razgar  steps.  He
      found that there had been an interference with the  right  to  respect
      for family life as it is an entirely natural expectation of  a  family
      member to be able to visit a sibling and his  family  at  their  home,
      particularly for family events such as birthdays, graduations and also
      if, as seems to be the case  here,  those  siblings  are  particularly
      close. He was impressed by the sponsor's evidence who seemed  to  have
      guilt for having led the claimant into this situation on  the  earlier
      occasion, and also his heartfelt  plea  as  to  the  finality  of  his
      brother never being able to visit him again [17].


   6. He struggled to see that the desire on the entry  clearance  officer's
      part to control improper  immigration  into  the  UK  was  "a  genuine
      desire" [19]. This appeared to be an entirely  genuine  visit  and  he
      considered that the refusal cannot be proportionate, balanced  against
      the claimant's sponsor's right to family life [20].


   7. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers
      found that it was arguable that the Judge may  not  have  sufficiently
      addressed the question of whether or not the relationships between the
      people  concerned  here  amounted  to  "family  life"  for  Article  8
      purposes.


   8. Ms Isherwood relied on the grounds of appeal as  well  as  the  recent
      decision of the Upper Tribunal in the appeal of Adjei (visit  visas  -
      Article 8) [2015]  UKUT  261  (IAC).  She  submitted  that  the  first
      question to be addressed in a case where only human rights grounds are
      available on appeal,  was  whether  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention is engaged at all. If not, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
      to embark upon an assessment of the decision of the ECO and should not
      do so.


   9. She submitted that in this case, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
      failed to have regard to the established  case  law  regarding  family
      life which will not normally exist between adult siblings.


  10. I explained the position to Mr Butt who was given  all  the  necessary
      documentation, including the decision in Adjei, prior to the  hearing.
      I afforded him an opportunity to peruse  the  documentation  which  he
      did. He subsequently informed me that he understood  the  issues  that
      had been raised.


  11. He submitted in reply that the claimant has a good business. He wanted
      to come to the UK to attend his niece's birthday as well as visit  his
      family. He would go back. He stated that he, Mr Butt, goes once a year
      to Pakistan. He said that his daughter, the claimant's niece, has also
      been to Pakistan on occasion.






Assessment


  12. I find that in considering whether there had been an interference with
      the claimants asserted rights, the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to
      have regard to the notion of family life for the purpose of Article 8.
      He found that it was an entirely natural expectation  to  be  able  to
      visit a sibling and his family at their home, particularly for  events
      such as birthdays. He found that the siblings are close.


  13. However, the relationship between the claimant and his sponsor is  one
      between  adult  relatives.  As  such,  that  discloses  no  aspect  of
      dependency and is not in any way different to what might  be  expected
      between such relatives. There  is  no  evidence  of  any  particularly
      strong relationship on the evidence, nor between the claimant and  his
      niece.


  14. Nor was any reason given as to why those relationships  could  not  be
      maintained in the way that they have been over the years. The  sponsor
      has accepted that he as well as his niece has  visited  Pakistan.  The
      sponsor visits at least once a year.  There  is  accordingly  no  good
      reason why the  UK  based  relatives  cannot  visit  the  claimant  in
      Pakistan should they wish to do so.


  15. In this case, the claimant has established  his  own  family  life  in
      Pakistan. As found by the Judge, he has strong bonds in Pakistan, both
      familial and work related. The sponsor has previously taken his family
      on such visits and will continue such visits [12 (iv)]


  16. I have had regard to the approach adopted in Adeji,  supra,  including
      the reference to the decision of the Human Rights Court in Advic v  UK
      [1995] 20 EHRR CD125, that the protection of Article 8 does not extend
      to links between adult siblings living apart for a long  period  where
      they were not dependent on each other.


  17. In this case, there is no evidence of such  dependence  between  these
      siblings. Moreover, there must be  more  than  normal  emotional  ties
      between adult relatives for family life to exist for the  purposes  of
      Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


  18. Nor is the Judge's approach consistent with the  earlier  decision  of
      Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) where the
      Tribunal made it clear that they were dealing with a very narrow range
      of claimants. In practical terms, it was likely to be limited to cases
      where the relationship is that of husband and wife or other close life
      partners, or a parent and minor child,  but  even  then  it  will  not
      necessarily be extended to cases  where,  for  example,  the  proposed
      visit will not add significantly to the time the people involved spend
      together.


  19. I find that the circumstances of the claimant and his relatives in the
      UK do not give rise to family life for the purposes of  Article  8  of
      the Human Rights Convention.


  20. For these reasons, the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  entry
      clearance officer is allowed. I substitute a fresh decision dismissing
      the claimant's appeal.


           No anonymity direction is made.











         Signed                              Date 15 June 2015


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




