
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V4

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/03081/2014
                                                               VA/03084/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                            SAMIR KARAMAT SHEIKH
                                NADIMA SAMIR
                        anonymity direction NOT MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, instructed by Kadmos Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   Following a hearing on 9 July 2015 in which we found an  error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Judge who had heard  the  appellants'
    appeals in December 2014, this is the remaking of the decision  on  the
    appeal.

2.   The appellants, who  are  husband  and  wife,  had  applied  for  entry
    clearance to enable them to visit their daughter and son-in-law in  the
    United Kingdom. The Entry Clearance Officer accepted that the  daughter
    and son-in-law would pay for their maintenance and accommodation  while
    in the United Kingdom but had concerns about the appellants'  financial
    circumstances and as a consequence as to their intentions.  The date of
    refusal is 13 May 2014.

3.   The judge noted that the appeal could only be  on  race  relations  and
    human rights grounds in light of changes to the Rules, but nevertheless
    concluded that it was important to establish whether the appellants met
    the  requirements  of  the  Rules  as  this  would   be   relevant   to
    consideration of their appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.  It was also
    the case that  by  the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the  judge  the
    appellants' daughter was pregnant and a further reason  for  the  visit
    was to see their new grandchild.  The judge found that  the  appellants
    satisfied the requirements of the Rules and that the  appeal  succeeded
    under Article 8.

4.   In our decision which we  took  at  the  hearing  on  9  July  2015  we
    concluded that the judge's determination was flawed by error of law  in
    that he had not made a finding as to whether there was family  life  in
    this case.  This was in essence the only matter  that  required  to  be
    determined at the fresh hearing.

5.   Mr Yeo adopted and developed points set out in his  skeleton  argument.
    He argued that not a lot had to be done to engage Article 8 in  such  a
    case and an artificial distinction had been made  between  private  and
    family life as was done by the Home Office in  the  Immigration  Rules.
    There was a reminder of that in the decision in Singh [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    630.  Even if family life were not engaged, often  private  life  would
    be.  The Court of Appeal had said at paragraph 25 that the  factors  to
    be examined in order to assess proportionality were the same regardless
    of whether family or private life was engaged.

6.   In effect the same  was  said  in  Khoroshenko  v  Russia  (Application
    number 41418/04).  This involved a number of members  of  the  extended
    family of a serving prisoner which was found to engage private life and
    family life.  Private life was very broad, as was  illustrated  by  the
    authorities set out in the skeleton including Razgar [2004] 2AC 368 and
    X v  Iceland  (Application  number  6825/74).   This  was  of  especial
    relevance where there was no breach of the Immigration Rules as was the
    case here.  Article 8 was very broad and was capable of protecting  all
    expressions of family life including an adopted child as  in  Marckx  v
    Belgium (Application number 6833/74).

7.   With regard to the recent decisions of the Tribunal  concerning  family
    visits and Article 8, it was argued  that  Mostafa  [2015]  UKUT  00122
    (IAC) contained the right approach  except  that  it  did  not  address
    private life but the Tribunal had not been asked  to  do  so.   It  was
    argued that if a person met the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    and the human right was engaged and there was some kind of interference
    then it could not be proportionate to exclude the person.  It was  said
    in Mostafa that there could be  exceptions to that principle,  but  the
    normal rule was that if  Article  8  was  engaged   and  there  was  an
    interference and the requirements  of  the  Rules  were  met  then  the
    appellant would succeed.

8.   It was argued that the decision in Adeji  [2015]  UKUT  216  (IAC)  was
    wrong.  There was no consideration of the private life dimension  or  a
    holistic taking of private and family  life  together.   Account  of  a
    number of other matters had been taken  which  were  more  relevant  to
    proportionality.  It was also wrong in seeming to encourage  judges not
    to assess compliance with the Rules in such a  case.   It  was  clearly
    important to do so as the  Rules  normally  determine  proportionality.
    The  decision  in  Kaur  [2015]  UKUT  487  (IAC)  also  assisted   the
    appellants' argument.  In that case the appellant had not met the terms
    of the Rules, but it was accepted  that  family  life  was  established
    where the proposed visit was by an 83 year old woman to her son and his
    family.  Contact between families was important, as had  been  said  in
    Kaur.

9.   In Abbasi [2015] UKUT 463 (IAC) compliance with the Rules had not  been
    considered at all but it should be a key issue in  these  cases.   That
    decision was helpful on the issue of private life, noting that  it  was
    quite a broad concept.

10.  Mr Yeo argued that the appropriate approach  was  to  follow  what  had
    been said in Mostafa but to accept that private life was just as  valid
    as family life and should be assessed and if the person met  the  Rules
    they would succeed.  It was an important issue, as all  appeals  lodged
    since April 2015 and some before that could be on human rights  grounds
    only.  The Home Office position was that human rights would be  engaged
    in a lot of Appendix FM applications  even  if  not  referred  to,  for
    example, cases involving spouses, and compliance with  the  Immigration
    Rules would be very important to human rights, so compliance  with  the
    Rules, although not on the face of the statute, was nevertheless a  key
    issue with regard to human rights.  The fact that  the  children  could
    visit the parents in Pakistan was irrelevant to whether family life was
    engaged and even if the approach in Kugathas [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  was
    employed, private life was engaged as families wanted  to  be  together
    and maintain contact and visit  and  attend  festivals  together.   The
    child, who, was now 6 months old, had not been conceived at the date of
    application but the fact of its birth  was  important  with  regard  to
    ties.

11.  It was not appropriate to begin  with  the  restrictive  approach.  The
    right of appeal had not been removed and as  there  were  human  rights
    grounds there was no reason to interpret it restrictively or limit  the
    number of appeals.  Historically many appeals had  succeeded,  and  the
    Home Office recognised the importance of  maintaining  family  contact,
    with the regular reference to "modern means of communication" but  that
    was not the same as actual contact.  Restrictive cases such as Kugathas
    and Singh arose in the context of settlement applications.   Article  8
    was flexible and there was no need to follow the restrictive  approach.
    It was a question of  respect  for  family  life.   There  was  also  a
    question not only of the appellant's rights but  also  those  of  their
    daughter to see  her  parents  and  the  matter  should  be  considered
    holistically.

12.  In his submissions Mr Tufan referred to  and  relied  on  his  skeleton
    argument.  As to whether family or private life  was  engaged,  it  was
    necessary for there to be more than emotional  ties  for  there  to  be
    family life and there was  no  evidence  of  dependency.   It  was  not
    sufficiently serious for private life to be engaged.  All  the  private
    life was in Pakistan.  The application therefore failed.

13.  If the Tribunal disagreed and found it  was  engaged,  the  facts  were
    curious.  There was the appellant's statement, but there was no  record
    of the child on the Home Office system and there  had  never  been  any
    evidence of the child's birth.  The judge had been wrong to  take  into
    account  the family's hope to have the parents in the United Kingdom to
    celebrate the child's birth as the decision was in May 2014, which  was
    eleven months before the birth of the child.   It  was  a  question  of
    Article 8 as at the date of decision.

14.  Mr Tufan also argued in line  with  his  skeleton  that  there  was  no
    interference.  There was the option to visit which was always open, and
    it was delayed by the  child's  birth,  but  there  had  been  previous
    visits. Also the sponsor only had leave for a few more  months  at  the
    date of hearing although  it  had  now  been  extended  but  it  was  a
    precarious status.

15.  As regards the case law, it was the case that permission to  appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal had been  granted  in  Mostafa.   Mr  Tufan  relied
    mainly on what was said in Adjei.  It was  a  reported  and  persuasive
    decision.  Kaur and Abbasi really took matters no further.

16.  We reserved our determination.

17.  In its recent judgment in Singh, the Court of Appeal set  out  in  some
    detail the relevant authorities leading to the conclusion at  paragraph
    24 that in the case of adults, in the context of  immigration  control,
    there is no legal or factual presumption as to the existence or absence
    of family life for the purposes of Article 8.  The court went on to say
    that the love and  affection  between  an  adult  and  his  parents  or
    siblings will not of itself justify a finding of  family  life.   There
    has to be something more.  The court went on to  say  at  paragraph  25
    that the debate as to whether an applicant has or has not a family life
    for the purposes of Article 8 is liable to be arid and academic, and as
    had been said by the Court of Human Rights in AA  [2012]  INLR  1,  the
    factors to be examined in order to assess proportionality are the  same
    regardless of whether family or private life is engaged.

18.  In Razgar, it was said with regard to  the  scope  and  extent  of  the
    private life dimension of Article 8 that:

         "Elusive although the concept  is,  I  think  one  must  understand
         'private life'  Article 8 as extending to those features which  are
         integral to a person's identity or ability to function socially  as
         a person."

19.  Mr Yeo has also drawn our attention to X v Iceland where  it  was  said
    that "the right to respect for private life ... comprises  also,  to  a
    certain degree, the right to establish  and  to  develop  relationships
    with other human beings, especially in  the  emotional  field  for  the
    development and fulfilment of one's own personality."

20.  Clearly the central point in this case  is  whether  or  not  there  is
    family or private life.  Whereas there is clearly, as we have  set  out
    above, a legal context to  this,  it  is  in  our  view  essentially  a
    question of mixed fact  and  law.   With  regard  to  the  family  life
    element, we note what was said by the Court of Appeal in Singh,  itself
    borrowing from other authorities in particular Kugathas, where  it  was
    said by Arden LJ at paragraph 25, that: "In my judgement, a family life
    is not established between an adult child and his surviving  parent  or
    other siblings unless something more exists than normal emotional  ties
    ...".  She went on to say "Such ties might exist if the appellant  were
    dependent on his family or vice versa.  It is not,  however,  essential
    that the members of the family should be in the  same  country  ...  it
    will probably be exceptional."

21.  On the facts in Kaur, family life was found to  exist  between  the  83
    year old appellant and her son and  his  wife  and  children.   It  was
    accepted that she enjoyed ties and had family going beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties between an elderly mother/ grandmother and  her  sponsor
    son/grandchildren; it was also accepted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was entitled to attach particular weight to the evidence that the
    claimant  had  played  a  central  role  in   bringing   up   the   two
    grandchildren.

22.  In the instant  case,  the  appellants  have  not  visited  the  United
    Kingdom since their daughter came  here  in  December  2011.    In  her
    statement and oral evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the
    appellants' daughter said that she  misses  her  parents  terribly  and
    maintains regular contact by modern means but it is  not  the  same  as
    being with each other until she came to the  United  Kingdom  they  had
    lived together.  She had visited them in August - September 2012.

23.  In our view this does not amount to family life, bearing  in  mind  the
    guidance in Singh, Kugathas and  the  other  authorities.   It  is  the
    normal relationship between parents and an adult child and her  husband
    and one which does not engage Article 8 family life.

24.  As regards private life, we have set out above the general guidance  as
    to what private life entails.  It is relevant also  to  note  what  was
    said in AA v United Kingdom (Application no.  800/08:  [2012]  INLR  1:
    "... it is not necessary to decide the question [of whether  there  was
    family life between the proposed deportee, aged  24,  and  his  mother]
    given that, as Article 8 also  protects  the  right  to  establish  and
    develop relationships  with other human beings and  the  outside  world
    and can sometimes embrace aspects of an individual's  social  identity,
    it must be accepted that the totality of social  ties  between  settled
    migrants and the community in which  they  are  living  constitutes  an
    interference with his right to respect  for  private  life"  (paragraph
    49).  It is of course relevant to bear in mind the context of a settled
    migrant's situation in that case, but we agree with Mr Yeo that private
    life as much as family  life  can  engage  Article  8(1)  in  an  entry
    clearance case.

25.  However that cannot entail an advantage for  private  life  cases  over
    family life cases.  Just as the "something more than  normal  emotional
    ties" element is necessary to establish family life  between  an  adult
    child and her parent, the same must be so for  private  life,  and  the
    absence  of  that  extra  quality  to  the  relationship  between   the
    appellants and their daughter and her family must be of equal relevance
    to the argument that they have a protected private life.

26.  Accordingly this appeal fails in limine on the issue of whether or  not
    Article 8 is engaged.  If we are wrong in  this  respect,  we  consider
    that the appeal could not  succeed  on  the  basis  that  there  is  no
    interference. Private/family life can be maintained,  as  it  has  been
    already, by the sponsor visiting her parents in Pakistan.

27.  We should say that otherwise we agree that had it come to the  question
    of  proportionality,  the  fact  that  the   appellants   satisfy   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  would  mean  that  if  they  had
    established private or family life and an interference the  refusal  to
    grant leave would be disproportionate.  There may be exceptional cases,
    as alluded to in Mostafa, where that might not be the case, but we have
    been unable to think of any although we accept that that  caution  must
    remain.

28.  However, for the reasons set out above, these appeals are dismissed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



    No anonymity direction is made.

    No fee award is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
