
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/03698/2014
                                                               VA/03699/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

               Mrs marie iveline mandjongui dihang eps ngolle
                           Mr isaac richard ngolle
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Onalo, solicitor of R. Spio & Company
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellants, who are citizens  of  Cameroon,  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Respondent  to  refuse  their  applications  for  entry
    clearance to the UK as visitors.  Their ensuing appeals were  heard  on
    19 May 2015 at Hatton Cross by  Judge  Onoufriou.   Both  parties  were
    represented, the Appellants by Ms Onalo.  In a decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 4 June 2015, the judge allowed the appeals
    under the Immigration Rules, writing that there was therefore  no  need
    for him to consider it under Article 8.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Respondent on 13th August  2015
    by Judge Hollingworth on the basis that the failure  of  the  judge  to
    consider the appeal under Article 8 was an arguable error of law.

3.   At the start of the error  of  law  hearing  both  parties  said  that,
    subject to the consent of the Tribunal,  they  were  agreeable  to  the
    decision being set aside on the basis that the judge had  not  had  the
    power to allow it under the Immigration Rules whilst being remitted  to
    the same judge to decide it under Article 8.

Determination

4.   The judge purported to decide the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, by the time of the hearing, the right  of  appeal  for  family
    visitors  had  been  abrogated,  save  on  human  rights  grounds.   He
    therefore had no jurisdiction to do so.

5.   I accordingly set the decision aside.  At the request of both  parties,
    I remit the appeals to Judge Onoufriou to decide them under  Article  8
    of the 1950 Convention.

Decision

6.   The original decision contains a material  error  of  law  and  is  set
    aside.

7.   The appeals  are  remitted  to  Judge  Onoufriou  at  Hatton  Cross  to
    determine them under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

8.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated: 11 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

