
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: VA/03164/2014
      VA/03168/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 7 July 2015                        |                On 14 July 2015      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                               mr himat singh
                               mr baldev singh
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                           visa OFFICER, new delhi

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel, instructed by M K Gill
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These are appeals by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt (Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt), promulgated
    on 17 March 2015, in which he concluded that  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants had sought to challenge the Respondent's decisions, both
    dated 22 May  2014,  by  which  applications  for  entry  clearance  as
    visitors were refused under Paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.




 3. The applications were made  on  9  May  2014  and  were  based  on  the
    following relevant circumstances. The first Appellant is the son of the
    second. They sought entry clearance to visit  the  sponsor,  Mrs  Dasho
    Kaur, a British citizen, aunt of the first Appellant and  sister-in-law
    of the second Appellant.




 4. The Respondent's refusal notices stated that any right  of  appeal  was
    limited to human rights grounds only.  The  Appellants  duly  lodged  a
    notice of appeal, the grounds of which included reliance on Article 8.



The decision of Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt

 5. The appeals came before Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt on 12  March  2015.  He
    concluded that by virtue of section 90 of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and the Immigration Appeals  (Family
    Visitor) Regulations 2012, neither Appellant had  a  right  of  appeal.
    This was because their relationships with to the sponsor did  not  fall
    within the scope of the 2012 Regulations. He declared that  he  had  no
    jurisdiction.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds  of  appeal  against  Judge  Vaudin  d'Imecourt's  decision
    essentially stated that as Article 8 had been raised  in  the  original
    grounds of appeal to the Tribunal, there was a limited right of  appeal
    by virtue of section 88A of the 2002 Act.




 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  on
    1 June 2015.



The hearing before us

 8. We heard brief and candid submissions from Mr Murphy.  He  provided  us
    with a skeleton argument prepared by another Counsel, a print out  from
    the 'Freemovement' website, and the recent decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630. Mr Nath provided us with a copy of
    Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC).

Decision on error of law
 9. It is clear that Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt erred  in  law  by  concluding
    that neither Appellant had a right of appeal. Mr  Nath  quite  properly
    accepted this to be the case.



10. The applications for entry clearance were made after 25 June 2013, this
    being the date on which section 52 of the Crime  and  Courts  Act  2013
    came into force. This brought in section 88A of the 2002  Act.  Section
    88A preserves a limited right of appeal in visit cases, and one of  the
    grounds available to an applicant is that  relating  to  human  rights,
    whether or not the applicant is  a  designated  family  member  of  the
    sponsor. In the present appeals, Article 8 was expressly raised in  the
    grounds of appeal.



11. In light of the above, both Appellant's had a right of appeal and Judge
    Vaudin d'Imecourt was wrong to have concluded otherwise.



Materiality

12. The error is material because whatever the  ultimate  strength  of  the
    Article 8 claims, the Appellants deserved, as a matter of fairness,  to
    have their  right  of  appeal  given  effect  and  then  to  receive  a
    substantive decision on the merits. We therefore set aside the decision
    of Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt.



Re-making the decisions

13. Having informed the parties of our decision as to the error of law,  we
    indicated that it would be appropriate to move on  immediately  to  re-
    make the decisions in both appeals. There was no disagreement  to  this
    proposed course of action.




14. Mr Murphy submitted that there was in fact private and family  life  as
    between the Appellants and the sponsor. In respect of private  life  he
    relied on a broad interpretation  of  the  term,  and  referred  us  to
    paragraphs 14, 24, and 25 of Singh. In respect of family life,  it  was
    possible for family life to exist in visit cases. The sponsor  was  the
    sister-in-law of the second Appellant.



15. Mr Nath accepted that none of the factual background to the appeals was
    in dispute. However, the Article 8 claims must fail,  as  there  is  no
    private and/or family life. He relied on Adjei.



Our findings, reasons and conclusions

16. In assessing the Appellants' Article 8 claims, we follow the well-known
    methodology set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.




17. In summary, we find that there was, as at the date of the  Respondent's
    decisions, no family life between the Appellants and  the  sponsor  for
    the purposes of Article 8. In addition, we  find  that  the  Appellants
    have failed to show that their private life rights were engaged.




18. In respect of private  life,  the  situations  in  which  an  appellant
    seeking to visit the United Kingdom will have established such  a  life
    here will be rare indeed.  Mr  Murphy's  reliance  on  Singh  is,  with
    respect, misconceived as this decision was made in the  very  different
    context of appellants who already resided in the  United  Kingdom  (see
    paragraph 3). There, the appellants had  in  fact  established  private
    lives by virtue of  their  ties  in  this  country.  In  addition,  the
    'exceptional' nature of Article 8 and its applicability to entry  cases
    concerning family life has been clearly stated by the IAT in Sun  Myung
    Moon (Human rights, entry clearance, proportionality) USA [2005]  UKIAT
    00112 (see paragraphs 68 and 73).



19. On the facts of the present appeals, there is no conceivable basis  for
    finding that either Appellant had a private life for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8. They had each travelled the United Kingdom on  one  previous
    occasion, the  first  Appellant  in  2010,  and  the  second  in  2005.
    Factually, that is it.



20. The Article 8 claims based on private life must fail at the first stage
    under the Razgar approach.



21. Turning to family life, we  accept  that  family  life  is  capable  of
    existing in visit cases: for example, a husband and wife who are living
    in different countries for good reason and seek to have contact by  way
    of short trips; or minor children visiting a  parent  settled  in  this
    country. As observed in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 112 (IAC), the class of appellants who might succeed  in  a  visit
    appeal based on family life is likely to be a narrow one (see paragraph
    24). Even for family life to exist  at  all,  something  materially  in
    excess of the normal emotional ties  between  family  members  must  be
    shown (see Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, which remains good law).



22. In the present appeals, both Appellants have lived entirely independent
    lives from that of the sponsor. Although we accept the  Appellants  and
    sponsor are related, mere relationship is not enough to engage  Article
    8(1). The evidence is simply that the Appellants wanted  to  visit  the
    sponsor in order to celebrate her sixtieth birthday.  Although  we  can
    appreciate that was an important milestone, this  alone  simply  cannot
    create family life for the  purposes  of  Article  8(1).  There  is  no
    evidence in tis case of any interdependency that would  engage  Article
    8(1).



23. The claims based on family life must also fail at the first step of the
    Razgar process.



24. As a result of the limited scope of the Appellants' appeal,  we  cannot
    and do not consider any issues arsing from the  Respondent's  decisions
    under Paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.



Anonymity

25. There has been no application for a direction, and none is appropriate.



Decisions in these appeals
The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

We re-make the decision by dismissing both appeals on human rights grounds



Signed                                       Date: 13 July 2015


H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


We have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee awards.


Signed                                       Date: 13 July 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

