
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
VA/03072/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 19th May 2017                      |         On 31st May 2017            |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                            John George Malekela
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Bettey Komba Malekela, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this matter  the  Sponsor  appeared  as  a  litigant  in  person.  I
    therefore explained the procedure for the hearing to  her  and  I  then
    went through the recent history in terms  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing and in respect of the grant of permission.

2.   Mrs Malekela said to me that her son was just coming to visit,  he  was
    not coming to stay.  She said: "So many people come to visit",  so  why
    was her son's application disallowed?  She said: "I work here and I pay
    tax."  She said: "I do not depend on the  government."   She  said:  "I
    sponsor them and I do not ask them to get benefits."  She told me  that
    she had sponsored her sister, "back  in  2014",  and  that  her  sister
    returned after three months.

3.   In his submission Mr Nath said that the  judge  had  been  clear.   The
    position in respect of Article 8 as to  whether  or  not  it  had  been
    elicited much in respect of the visit visa.  There was nothing  in  any
    shape or form to meet the  requirements  of  Article  8.   The  judge's
    findings were clear and precise.  Looking at the Appellant's  situation
    regarding his employment and savings, both the Entry Clearance  Officer
    and the Entry Clearance Manager  were  required  to  go  through  those
    things.  They had looked at the situation of the Appellant.  The  Rules
    were not met.  Quite simply that was the case and  in  any  aspect  the
    case could not move forward.

4.   I invited Mrs Malekela to respond and  what  I  did  first  was  to  go
    through each of the documents with her including  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's initial refusal.  I read out part of the judge's decision and
    then I read out Judge Appleyard's grant of permission as well.

5.   Mrs Malekela said: "There are many people who work here", that many  of
    them are English and others.  It includes cleaners who are  allowed  to
    visit her previous country of  Tanzania.   Tanzanians  are  here.   She
    said:

         "We pay a  lot  of  money  for  the  applications  and  it  is  not
         refundable.  There is a hectic application.  It is  too  much.   We
         need to have to use computers and were just turned down.  Where are
         the human rights?  Dogs have more rights.  Dogs  have  more  rights
         than me."


6.   I then took time to explain to Mrs Malekela that what  is  required  of
    me is to apply the Rules and the  laws  and  to  find  if  there  is  a
    material error of law.  Mrs Malekela then said she had a letter and she
    looked through her bag and after a few moments  she produced the notice
    of hearing, a Rule 24 reply and  directions  for  today's  hearing.   I
    asked her what point she was making and she said the point was that the
    first judge had not looked at human rights.

7.   I read through part of the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  refusal  letter
    again and she said that the evidence  that  her  son  would  return  to
    Tanzania was the return ticket and that her sister  had  gone  back  to
    Tanzania after a visit to the UK.  Mrs Malekela said: "I need my  human
    rights as they did not judge me fairly.  I am not allowed a visitor, so
    where are the human rights?"

8.   Before giving this extempore judgment I explained to Mrs Malekela  that
    I was going to refuse the application and, as I  explained  during  the
    discussion, even if  I  have  sympathy  for  the  situation  which  Mrs
    Malekela and her son find her in there are very clear Rules which  have
    to apply.  I can only overturn Judge Khan's  decision  if  there  is  a
    material error of law.  In my judgment, it is very clear that there  is
    no material error of law in Judge Khan's decision.

9.   It is worth going back to the refusal of entry clearance by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 15th April 2015, and that said the following:

         ".   You propose to travel to the UK for a period of five months to
             visit your mother.  I note that you  propose  to  travel  with
             your brother who will be travelling to settle in the UK.


         .    I note that this is your first visit to the UK  and  that  you
             are single with no dependants.


         .    You state that you are unemployed and have declared no income.
              I note that  you  have  provided  copies  of  money  transfer
             receipts, however, these stand in isolation.


         .    You have submitted a letter from your Sponsor that states  she
             is writing to support your application to settle in the UK.


         .    I note that you own no land, savings or  assets  in  your  own
             right and you have no dependent relatives.  Given  this  I  am
             not satisfied that you are settled or established, or that you
             have shown sufficiently strong family, social or economic ties
             to Tanzania.  Conversely, you state that you have a mother  in
             the UK who is your financial Sponsor.  Consequently, I am  not
             satisfied, on the balance of probabilities that you intend  to
             stay the period you have stated  or  given  the  circumstances
             outlined above will comply with conditions  of  visitor  entry
             clearance.


         .    There is no indication of the amount of financial support  you
             receive.  There are no other  documents  submitted  with  your
             application  to  allow  me  to  consider  your  own  financial
             circumstances further.


         ..."


10.  In the grounds of appeal the Sponsor said, amongst  other  things,  the
    following:

         "I am the Sponsor for two of my children.  I came in  this  country
         September 1995 [maybe 1993] until this day of 09 October 2015,  no-
         one from my children or any member of my family managed to come  in
         this country.  I pay tax, I am not on benefit of any kind, my first
         daughter struggled for visa in Tanzania, she was denied visa  until
         she passed away on 24 June 2008.  Again, I  struggle  to  bring  my
         husband, who was in need of my personal care, but all was  in  vain
         until he passed away on 08/10/2015.  I am the only one bread winner
         for the whole family.  I am also a taxpayer  and  all  my  children
         depend on my wages for their food and upkeep."


11.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan heard the appeal as  a  papers  case  on
    request at Hatton Cross in August 2016 and in a decision promulgated on
    2nd September 2016 he noted at the end of paragraph 1:  "The  Appellant
    only has a limited right of appeal."  He noted at  paragraph  10:  "The
    Appellant made an application as a family visitor in order to visit his
    mother in the United Kingdom for a period of five months."   The  judge
    noted the Entry Clearance Manager's  review  at  paragraph  15  of  his
    decision and then at paragraph 19 Judge Khan said: "The Sponsor was not
    in attendance and no further evidence has been provided in  support  of
    the Appellant's appeal.  The Appellant or the Sponsor have not provided
    evidence to show in this case  the  Appellant  has  been  discriminated
    against."  And then after further findings at the end of  paragraph  21
    the judge said: "There is  no  breach  of  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights."

12.  The Appellant appealed against that decision, setting out what  I  have
    read already in terms of the grounds of appeal.  Permission was granted
    by Resident Judge Appleyard dated 13th  April  2017  and  he  said  the
    following at paragraphs 3 and 4:

         "3.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal appear to be  drafted
             by the Sponsor.  They do not disclose an arguable error of law
             and are no more than a statement that she wishes the appeal to
             be considered further.  As the Appellant  is  unrepresented  I
             have  considered  the  decision  itself  to  ensure  that   it
             discloses no obvious errors of law.


         4.   In so doing I have reminded myself that appeal rights in cases
             of this kind are restricted.  The appeal can only  proceed  on
             residual grounds contained in Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of  the
             2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act.  On 25 June 2013
             Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act  was  commenced.   This
             restricted the appeal rights  for  visitors  coming  to  visit
             family members in the United Kingdom.  The restrictions  apply
             to any applications made on  or  after  25  June  2013.   This
             appeal should have been  considered  by  the  judge  on  human
             rights grounds as opposed to failure to meet  the  Immigration
             Rules.  Thus there is an arguable error of law."


13.  As I explained during the hearing Judge Khan did note  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 1 that there was a limited right of appeal.  The  judge  said
    that specifically.  The judge notes at paragraph 10  that  this  was  a
    family visitor application and then at the end of paragraph 21 he  said
    there was no breach of the Appellant's Article  8  rights,  i.e.  human
    rights.

14.  Now, as I also explained at length to the Sponsor, I do not  doubt  for
    one moment that she is not the hardworking woman she says she is.   Nor
    do I  doubt for one moment that she has been paying tax for  very  many
    years.  Indeed, I do not doubt that she deeply cares for  her  children
    and they for her but my task is not to assess whether or  not  she  has
    been paying tax.  My task is not really either to assess how  great  an
    affection there is between the family.  My task is  to  assess  whether
    there is a material error of law  in  Judge  Khan's  decision.   In  my
    judgment, it is clear that the judge did not make a material  error  of
    law.  There simply was not the evidence before him  to  enable  him  to
    have allowed the appeal.

15.  Even if I am wrong and the judge did not consider human rights,  in  my
    judgment, because of the lack of evidence presented to  the  Judge,  it
    was next to impossible for the Appellant to  have  overcome  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's clear decision. In the circumstances  it  would  be
    futile for me to find in some artificial way that there was a  material
    error of law when there is not and for the case to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  As I explained to the Sponsor, all that would  do
    is to cause even more anguish and concern for  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor and would be of no benefit to her or to the Appellant.

16.  Now, it is clearly a matter for the Sponsor and  the  Appellant  as  to
    what they do next but if they are to make an application for a visit in
    the future then they will need to consider the Rules very carefully  to
    ensure there is compliance with them by also  providing  the  necessary
    evidence.  I know there are severe restrictions in  funding  for  these
    sorts of cases, i.e. Legal Aid, but the Appellant and Sponsor may  well
    wish to consider whether they want to take  legal  advice  before  they
    make a new application for entry clearance in the future.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 19 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 19 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


