
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th August 2015                  |On 18th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            MRS shazia farrukhfor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bexson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  25th  August  1948.
    The Appellant had applied through the Entry Clearance Office New  Delhi
    for entry clearance to visit the United Kingdom for  six  months.   Her
    application was considered under paragraph 41 of the Immigration  Rules
    and was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 30th May  2014.   The
    Appellant lodged Notice of Appeal on 20th June 2014  stating  that  she
    had a genuine intention to visit her son, grandson and  family  in  the
    United Kingdom and that the appeal engaged Article 8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 2. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morris  sitting
    at Taylor House on 12th February 2015.  In a determination  promulgated
    on 24th February 2015 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 3. On 24th March 2015 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 11th May 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Page noted that this was a limited
    appeal under Section 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act and that  the  permission
    to appeal had identified an arguable material error of law at paragraph
    1 where it was complained that the judge's brief findings at  paragraph
    15 of the decision did not fully engage with the approach to  be  taken
    under Article 8.  Judge Page noted that the evidence of the Appellant's
    son was that the family could not return to Afghanistan  to  visit  the
    Appellant there, so no contact could take place between  the  Appellant
    and her son unless entry clearance was granted for a visit.  Judge Page
    considered that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    at paragraph 17 of his decision focused  on  the  issue  of  dependency
    which was not  the  central  issue  in  the  appeal,  neither  was  the
    Appellant's standard of living  in  Afghanistan.   He  noted  that  the
    central issue under Article  8  in  this  appeal  was  whether  it  was
    proportionate to prevent the Appellant having contact with her son  and
    her son's family in the United Kingdom with a face-to-face visit.   The
    appeal was not being considered under the  Immigration Rules but  under
    Article 8 so this was a central issue and that as  this  central  issue
    had arguably not been adequately addressed  he  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 4. On 15th May 2015 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24 and contended that there would have  to  be  clear
    evidence to support the assertion that  the  Sponsor  could  not  visit
    Afghanistan and further contrary to  the  assertion  contained  in  the
    grant of permission it was not the case that there could not be face-to-
    face contact without the Appellant being  granted  entry  clearance  as
    there was clearly the opportunity for the family to meet in  a  country
    neighbouring  Afghanistan.   In  any  event  the  Secretary  of   State
    contended that this would appear a private life matter and as such  not
    of significant consequence to engage Article 8.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before  me.   The  Appellant
    appears by her instructed Counsel Ms Bexson.   Ms  Bexson  is  familiar
    with this matter having appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Avery.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Ms Bexson relies on the Grounds  of  Appeal  and  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager's review when the issue of whether or not the  Appellant's  son
    was prevented visiting her in Afghanistan was considered.  She  submits
    that there is an issue in the Appellant's son returning to visit her in
    Afghanistan on the basis that he was  employed  as  an  interpreter  in
    Afghanistan and therefore would be on a security list which would place
    him at risk if he were to attempt to visit.  She submits that  this  is
    not mentioned at paragraph 17 of the  determination  and  submits  that
    because of the  Appellant's  son's  previous  occupation  this  was  an
    exceptional case under Article 8 which should be allowed.   Her  second
    argument relates to the position of the Appellant's grandchildren  whom
    she reminds me are a daughter aged 18 who had not seen her grandmother,
    the Appellant, for sixteen years and the Sponsor's son who was  14  and
    had never seen his grandmother and that the purpose of  the  visit  was
    for the Appellant to celebrate her granddaughter's 18th  birthday  with
    her family in the UK.  She submits that it would not  be  possible  for
    them to meet in Afghanistan and it is difficult for  them  to  keep  in
    touch on a long-term basis by electronic means and submits  that  there
    is an argument that the children's rights  to  see  respectively  their
    mother and grandmother were being breached and that  this  is  a  point
    that has not been addressed by  the  judge  at  paragraph  17  when  in
    considering Article 8 he has given a  very  brief  determination.   She
    submits that the judge's approach has been to look solely at the  issue
    of dependency and that this was not a key issue in the case.

 7. Mr Avery responds by stating that the judge has albeit  briefly,  given
    due and proper consideration to the appeal under Article 8.  The  first
    question to be considered is whether Article 8 is engaged and the judge
    has found that Article 8 was not engaged.  He relies on  the  authority
    (albeit not specifically referred to by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge)
    of Adjei (visit visas -Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00261 (IAC).  He  submits
    that the rationale therein has been considered  by  the  judge  (albeit
    that authority was not before him) and that the judge  has  found  that
    Article 8 was not engaged.  Further he  contends  that  the  judge  was
    correct in his approach to see if dependency was  relevant  and  as  to
    whether there was family life and he made findings that he was entitled
    to.  He submits that there is no error in the decision as the judge did
    not having made his findings that Article 8 was not  engaged,  need  to
    address the approach adopted at paragraphs 14 and 15 of Adjei and  that
    the judge had made adequate reasons  for  his  findings  and  that  the
    determination discloses no material error of law.

 8. Ms Bexson in response contends that it is an error of law not  to  have
    found that Article 8 was engaged and that it was an  issue  of  contact
    between the Appellant, her son and grandchildren not just an  issue  of
    dependency.  She points out that this  is  a  genuine  case  where  for
    security reasons where they meet is of some importance.  She  asked  me
    to set aside the decision, to find that there is a  material  error  of
    law and to remake the decision allowing the appeal.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

The Relevant Case Law

11. It is appropriate to give due consideration to the  relevant  case  law
    and to see to what extent, even  though  it  is  not  referred  to  the
    principles therein were considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

    In Adjei (visit visas -Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00261 (IAC) it was held:

         "1.  The first question  to  be  addressed  in  an  appeal  against
             refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human
             rights grounds are available is whether article 8 of the  ECHR
             is engaged at all. If it is not, which will  not  infrequently
             be the case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to  embark  upon
             an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the  rules  and
             should not do so. If article 8 is engaged,  the  Tribunal  may
             need to look at the extent to which the claimant  is  said  to
             have failed to meet the requirements of the rule because  that
             may inform the proportionality balancing  exercise  that  must
             follow.   Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT
             112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition.

         2.   As compliance with para 41 of HC 395 is not a ground of appeal
             to be decided by the Tribunal, any  findings  concerning  that
             will carry little weight, especially if based  upon  arguments
             advanced only by the appellant. If the appellant were to  make
             a fresh application for  entry  clearance  the  ECO  will,  if
             requested to do so, have regard to the assessment carried  out
             by the judge but will not be bound by those findings to  treat
             the appellant as a person who, at least at  the  date  of  the
             appeal hearing, met the requirements of paragraph 41."

12. In Kaur (visit appeals: Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC) it was held:

         "1.  In visit appeals the Article 8 decision on an appeal cannot be
             made in a vacuum.  Whilst judges  only  have  jurisdiction  to
             decide whether the decision is unlawful under s.6 of the Human
             Rights  Act  1998  (or  shows  unlawful  discrimination)  (see
             Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC)
             and Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT  0261  (IAC)),
             the starting-point for deciding that must be the state of  the
             evidence  about  the   appellant's   ability   to   meet   the
             requirements of paragraph 41 of the immigration rules.

         2.   The restriction in visitor cases of grounds of appeal to human
             rights does  not  mean  that  judges  are  relieved  of  their
             ordinary duties of fact-finding or  that  they  must  approach
             these in a qualitatively different way.  Where relevant to the
             Article 8  assessment,  disputes  as  to  the  facts  must  be
             resolved by taking into account the evidence  on  both  sides:
             see Adjei at [10] bearing in mind that  the  burden  of  proof
             rests on the appellant.

         3.   Unless  an  appellant  can  show  that  there  are  individual
             interests at stake covered by Article  8  "of  a  particularly
             pressing nature" so as to give rise to a  "strong  claim  that
             compelling circumstances may exist to justify the grant of LTE
             [Leave to Enter] outside the rules": (see  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
             EWCA Civ 387 at [40]  and  [56])  he  or  she  is  exceedingly
             unlikely to succeed.  That proposition must also hold good  in
             visitor appeals."

Findings

13. The above authorities set out the approach to be made when  considering
    the issues of Article 8 in visit visa appeals.  It is not necessary for
    the First-tier Tribunal to distinguish between family and private life.
     I acknowledge that the findings of the judge are limited to those  set
    out at paragraph 17 of his determination.  The judge heard the evidence
    and made findings that the Appellant had not shown, on the  balance  of
    probabilities any family life with the Sponsor's wife or  children  and
    had having given due consideration  to  the  evidence  found  that  the
    Appellant had not shown on the balance  of  probabilities  that  family
    life exists.  Those were findings that were open to the judge.   Whilst
    I note what Ms Bexson submits the judge was entitled to find Article  8
    was not engaged and her submission that it was an  error  not  to  make
    such a finding (bearing in mind the judge heard  the  evidence  in  his
    conclusions) can amount to little more than disagreement and  does  not
    show that there was a material error of law.

14. Having made that finding the judge was not required to embark  upon  an
    assessment of the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer as is clearly
    set out as a rationale in Adjei.  Whilst the judge has not specifically
    gone on to refer to it the guidance in Kaur  shows  that  it  would  be
    necessary for the Appellant to show that there are individual interests
    at stake covered by Article 8 "of a particularly pressing nature" so as
    to give rise to a  "strong  claim  that  compelling  circumstances  may
    justify the grant of leave to enter outside the Rules".  That  guidance
    following the decision in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  380  states  that
    unless such a threshold is reached an Appellant is exceedingly unlikely
    to succeed and that that proposition must hold good in visitor appeals.



15. The judge did not err in not going on to consider such an approach.  He
    gives his reasons having heard the evidence  as  to  why  he  considers
    Article 8 is not engaged.   Those  were  reasons  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach.  In such circumstances  the  decision  discloses  no
    material error of law and it is  not  necessary,  nor  appropriate,  to
    consider whether  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  and  his  children
    can/should meet in India or any other  third  country.   I  acknowledge
    that such a finding will be a disappointment to the  Appellant  and  to
    the Sponsor but it is the  role  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider
    whether there is any material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  heard  the  appeal  and  the
    facts.  In such  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge made findings, albeit brief, that were open to  him  and
    as such the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose a  material  error
of law and the appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
