
   [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
VA/03280/2014

                                 THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision  and Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                         |
|On 4th August 2015                    |        On 14th August 2015         |
|                                      |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr EMIOLA RICHARD FOLARANMI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      absent
For the Respondent:   Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office presenting officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley, promulgated  on  26  January
2015 which allowed the Appellant's appeal under the immigration rules.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born 10 January  1987.  On  3  May
2014, the appellant applied  for  entry  clearance  to  visit  the  UK.  The
respondent refused the appellant's application on 15 May 2014.

4. The appellant appealed to the First Tier Tribunal.  First  Tier  Tribunal
Judge Malloy ("the judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision under the Immigration Rules and did not consider Article 8 ECHR.

5.  Grounds of appeal were lodged by the respondent and on  10  March  2015,
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin (sitting as a judge of the First Tier  Tribunal)
granted leave to appeal, stating inter alia

"The appellant has a limited right of appeal under Article 8  only  in  this
case. The judge has  considered  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules
without any consideration of Article 8; the only issue before him".

6. The appellant did not attend the appeal, nor was he  represented  at  the
appeal. I am satisfied that due notice of the appeal  was  served  upon  the
appellant at the address that was given. I am  satisfied  that  having  been
served notice of the hearing and not attended, it is  in  the  interests  of
justice to proceed with the hearing in the  appellant's  absence,  as  I  am
entitled to do  because  of  the  operation  of  Paragraph  38  of  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

7. On behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  the  judge's
findings and notice of decision relate entirely to  the  Immigration  Rules.
No consideration has been  given  to  Article  8  ECHR  which  is  the  only
competent ground of appeal. He relied on the case of Adjei  (visit  visas  -
Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC)  and  submitted  that  the  judge  had  no
jurisdiction to consider the Immigration Rules. The  decision  is  therefore
tainted by a material error of law.

8.      The appellant's application was  submitted  after  25th  June  2013,
consequently there is only a right of appeal under s.  84(1)(b)  or  (c)  of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  s.52  of  the  Crime  &
Courts Act 2013 removed the right of appeal except on human rights  or  race
relations grounds.

9.    In Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC) it was  held
that (i) The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal  to
grant entry clearance as a visitor  where  only  human  rights  grounds  are
available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all. If it is  not,
which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction
to embark upon an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the rules  and
should not do so. If article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look  at
the extent to which the  claimant  is  said  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
requirements of  the  rule  because  that  may  inform  the  proportionality
balancing exercise that must follow. Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)
[2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) is not authority for any  contrary  proposition;  (ii)
As compliance with para 41 of HC 395  is  not  a  ground  of  appeal  to  be
decided by the Tribunal, any findings  concerning  that  will  carry  little
weight, especially if based upon arguments advanced only by  the  appellant.
If the appellant were to make a fresh application for  entry  clearance  the
ECO will, if requested to do so, have regard to the assessment  carried  out
by the judge but will not be bound by those findings to treat the  appellant
as a person who, at least at  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing,  met  the
requirements of paragraph 41.

9.   Since  25  June  2013,  a  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  not   had
jurisdiction to consider an appeal against refusal of  a  visit  visa  other
than on human rights or  race  relations  grounds.  The  decision  therefore
contains a material error of law. The only relevant considerations were  the
considerations that the judge did not take account of. I  set  the  decision
aside.

10.   The appellant asks for this case to be determined on  the  documentary
evidence. No request  has  been  made  for  an  oral  hearing.  I  have  the
following documentation before me:

            (a)  The explanatory statement with its annexes; and
             (b)   The  notice  and  grounds  of  appeal,  with   supporting
      documents.

11 (a)      The appellant is a Nigerian national. He is single.  He  is  not
in  paid  employment  but  undertakes  voluntary  work.  The  appellant  has
graduated  from  college  and  was  carrying  out  voluntary   work   before
commencing his national youth service.

(b)   The appellant visited the UK  in  2008  and  again  in  2012.  He  was
refused entry to the UK in May 2012 and accused of misrepresentation.

(c)   The appellant applied to come to the UK  as  a  general  visitor.  The
appellant does not have relatives in the UK. The  appellant  previously  had
an  uncle  in  the  UK  who,  by  the  time  the  appellant  submitted   his
application, had returned to Nigeria.

12    In his visa application form, the appellant declares that  he  has  no
family members in the UK. The appellant was interviewed  by  the  respondent
in December 2014. In the course of that interview, the  appellant  told  the
respondent that, in the past, one of his uncles had  lived  in  the  UK  but
that his uncle had since returned to Nigeria.

13    The appellant does  not  have  any  family  members  in  the  UK.  The
appellant does not enjoy family life within the meaning of Article 8 of  the
1950 Convention in the UK.

14    The appellant is a Nigerian who has visited the UK for  short  periods
of time on two previous occasions. He pursued tertiary education in  Nigeria
and, at the time of application, was awaiting  deployment  to  the  National
Youth Service Corps. In his visa  application  form,  the  appellant  stated
that he wanted to come to the UK to indulge in some sightseeing.

15    Private life within the meaning of Article 8 of  the  1950  Convention
does not exist for the appellant  in  the  UK.  The  appellant's  home,  his
friends,  his  activities,  his  voluntary  work,  his  interest   and   his
possessions are  all  in  Nigeria.  Despite  the  fact  that  the  appellant
sprinkles reference to Article 8 ECHR between grounds of appeal  6  and  10,
in reality, Article 8 of the 1950 Convention is not engaged.

18    The appellant does not argue that the  Race  Relations  Act  has  been
      breached.

Decision

19    The decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Malloy  promulgated  on  26
January 2015 contains a material error of law. I therefore set it aside.

20    I remake the decision.

21    The appellant's appeal is dismissed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.



Signed                                                              Date
7th August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
