
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/04447/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 1 February 2016                   |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                              NATALIYA POPADYUK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Singh counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Ukraine was born on 26 August 1964 and  is
    thus 51 years old. The Appellant appealed against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 8 July 2014 to refuse to grant an  application
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a family  visitor  to  see
    her husband of 12 years standing, the sponsor, Wasyl  Bonk  who  is  89
    years old. First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy allowed the appeal on  human
    rights grounds and the Appellant now appeals with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

 3. The Respondent refused the application. The ECO considered the evidence
    produced of the Sponsors finances in  the  UK  and  the  Appellants  in
    Ukraine and found that he was unable to determine their  circumstances.
    As a result, he refused under paragraph 41 (i) and (ii) asserting  that
    she was not coming for a limited visit nor did she intend to return  at
    the end of her visit. The refusal noted that there was a limited  right
    of appeal in this case. The Appellant appealed on human rights grounds.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    Sponsor. The  Judge  concluded  that  The  Appellant  had  visited  the
    Appellant in the UK on 13 occasions since  2004  and  the  sponsor  had
    visited the Ukraine regularly to see his wife. The  Appellant  and  the
    sponsor have established family life by way of  regular  visits  rather
    than living together permanently. The parties  are  aware  they  cannot
    meet the requirements of the Rules and therefore their only  option  is
    to keep up regular visits. The decision interferes with family life and
    the interference is disproportionate.

 5. The grounds argue that the Judge misdirected herself because  there  is
    no interference with the family life the parties enjoyed  as  they  had
    chosen to live in separate countries and have visited  each  other  and
    would be able to continue their family life if the Sponsor visited  the
    Appellant.

 6. At the hearing before me Ms  Johnstone  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    relied on the grounds of appeal. She submitted that the  there  was  no
    interference as the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  had  maintained  their
    family life by way of regular  visits  and  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider why they could not continue in this way.  She  also  suggested
    that the proportionality assessment was  defective  as  the  Judge  had
    failed to engage with the provisions of section 117B of the Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 7. Mr Singh on behalf of the Appellants argued that  the  Judge  had  made
    clear findings and considered both caselaw and the Rules. He  suggested
    that paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules  did  not  provide  that  an
    application could be refused just  because  it  was  possible  for  the
    sponsor to visit  the  applicant.  He  suggested  that  the  Judge  had
    accepted the evidence of the Sponsor who said it was easier for her  to
    come to the UK than for him to go to Ukraine.

 8. Both parties accepted that if an error of law was found I should remake
    the decision.

The Law

 9. I was referred to the cases of Adjei (visit visas - Article  8)  [2015]
    UKUT 0261 (IAC) and Kaur (visit appeals; Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  487
    (IAC) and have taken them into account in so far as they  are  relevant
    to this decision.



Error of Law

10. This was an appeal against a refusal of entry  clearance  made  by  the
    Appellant on 20 June 2014 and refused in a notice dated 8 July 2014.

11. Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 amended s88A  of  the  2002
    Act so as to remove the right of appeal for persons visiting  specified
    family members. Although they are still able to bring an appeal on  the
    residual grounds in s 84(1) (b) and (c) of  the  2002  Act,  namely  on
    human rights and race relations grounds.

12. The Respondent's grounds of appeal focus on a narrow  issue  and  argue
    that the Judge has failed to engage with the argument that there is  no
    interference with the parties family life as  they  could  continue  to
    enjoy family life as the Sponsor could visit his wife in  Ukraine.  The
    Judges  determination  is  extremely  brief  and  the   only   possible
    assessment of whether there has been an interference  is  in  paragraph
    6(ii) and that is the comment that 'interruption in those visits  would
    have a significant effect upon their family life' without stating  why.
    I am satisfied that the reasoning is inadequate and that the  error  of
    law is material as had the Judge considered this the outcome could have
    been different.

13. Ms Johnstone also argued that the  assessment  of  proportionality  was
    inadequate and given that there was no reference to  section  117B  and
    that the balancing exercise consists simply of an  assertion  that  the
    decision is disproportionate it is inadequate.

14. I therefore set aside  the  decision  in  relation  to  the  Article  8
    assessment and in accordance with my discussion with the parties  I  go
    on to remake the decision.

Remaking the Decision

15. The Appellant sought entry clearance to the UK  to  visit  her  elderly
    husband  the  sponsor  who  lives  in  the  UK.  That  application  was
    considered by the Respondent by reference to paragraph 41 of the  Rules
    and the application was refused.

16. It is argued that the decision to refuse the Appellant entry  clearance
    to the UK engages Article 8.  I have determined the issue on the  basis
    of the questions posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  If  I
    find that Article 8 is engaged I will consider  whether  the  Appellant
    can meet the requirements of the Rules  as  this  is  relevant  to  the
    public interest and proportionality.

Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?

17. In this case I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  enjoy
    family life together as they have been married since 2004.

18. Since their marriage they acknowledged that they  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and  they  have  therefore  maintained  their
    relationship by visiting each other for periods of time every year. The
    Appellant has apparently made 13 visits to  the  UK  between  2004  and
    20012  but  after  the  expiration  of  her  last  visa  in  2013   her
    applications for entry clearance were refused.  Although Mr Bonk is  89
    he confirms that he has nevertheless continued to visit Ukraine and has
    indeed done so once a year since 1994 (paragraph 29  witness  statement
    dated 18 December 2014) and sometimes he has visited twice a year.

19. At the time of the appeal he  had  visited  Ukraine  most  recently  in
    September 2014 and indicated that he intended to visit his  wife  again
    the following year whether or not his wife was granted a visa  provided
    his health was alright. While it was easier for the Appellant  to  come
    to the UK there was no evidence before me to suggest  that  his  health
    had deteriorated since that time and that  he  was  unable  to  travel.
    While I note Mr Singh's argument that an application under paragraph 41
    of the Rules could not be refused  simply  because  the  sponsor  could
    visit the applicant I am satisfied that the questions  I  must  ask  in
    relation to Article 8 are different and that question  is  relevant  to
    the issue of whether there is an interference.

20. An interference with private or family life must be real if  it  is  to
    engage Art 8(1). While the threshold of engagement  is  low  I  am  not
    satisfied on the basis of the clear evidence before me, which was  that
    the Sponsor could and indeed intended to continue to visit his wife  in
    Ukraine and enjoy family life there as he had  done  previously,  there
    was any interference with family life.

21. Therefore, Article 8 is not engaged by the refusal decision.

Decision

22. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the decision is set aside

23. I remake the appeal.

24. I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed      Date 3.2.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

