

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/04485/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th January 2014                          |On 20th February 2014        |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President

                                   Between

                                 NAJMA ASLAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW YORK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Aziz Bhatti , of JUST Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


INTRODUCTION

   1.     This appeal has its origins  in  an  unsuccessful  application  by
      Najma Aslam (hereinafter "the Appellant") for a family visitor's  visa
      enabling her to enter the United Kingdom.  This application  was  made
      on 13th December 2012 and specified a projected date of travel to  the
      United Kingdom of 7th January 2013.  The application  was  refused  by
      decision of the Entry Clearance Officer ("the ECO") dated 23rd January
      2013. The ECO determined that the application was  non-compliant  with
      paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules, in that the Applicant  had
      falsely represented that she had not previously been refused entry  to
      the United Kingdom, whereas according to records  there  had  been  an
      earlier refusal in 2008.  The ECO noted further that  the  application
      did not include the expired passport  which  would  have  displayed  a
      refusal stamp.  The application was refused on this sole ground.

   2.     The Appellant appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  By
      its determination promulgated on 23rd August 2013, the  FtT  dismissed
      the appeal under both the Immigration Rules and Article 8  ECHR.   The
      Appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

THE CONTOURS OF THIS APPEAL

   3.     Permission to appeal was sought  on  six  grounds.   It  is  clear
      appears to me that four of these - grounds 1, 2, 4 and 5 -  amount  to
      little more than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's  assessment  and
      weighing of the evidence.  The remaining two grounds - numbers 3   and
      6 - are, however, of a different genre.  The 3rd ground states:

           "The procedural error consisted of the legal representative  not
           being afforded the opportunity to read or to question  the  last
           minute submission of the appeal document of 2008 of which the IJ
           somehow had the prior notice as it was in her  hands  before  we
           were finally allowed to enter the Court room."

      Ground 6 states:


           "And because of the events that had preceded the hearing as well
           as hostile  and  toxic  atmosphere  that  developed  during  the
           hearing, it was quite clear that IJ Gladstone will [sic]  refuse
           the appeal.  Therefore, she went through the determination  with
           a forensic tooth comb in order to justify the outcome.  Were the
           IJ to be [sic] in a calm and relaxed mood, she may have come  to
           a different decision ...


           It is requested that the permission  to  appeal  be  allowed  by
           calling the witness to prove or otherwise the misconduct of  the
           Learned Immigration Judge."


      The author of the grounds of appeal is the person who represented  the
      Appellant before the FtT, Mr  Bhatti  of  JUST  Immigration  Services.
      Enquiry on the part of this Tribunal at the  appeal  hearing  elicited
      that Mr Bhatti is  the holder of  a  Law  Degree  who,  though  not  a
      practicing barrister of solicitor, has been providing legal advice and
      representation in immigration and asylum cases for many years and does
      so  with  the  necessary  authorisation  from  OISC,  the   regulatory
      authority.


   4.     Mr Bhatti is the author of a witness statement which,  apparently,
      was submitted with the Grounds of Appeal.  This contains  Mr  Bhatti's
      account  of  events  at   the   hearing.    The   statement   contains
      particularised instances of alleged discourtesy and aggression on  the
      part of the Judge.  It is asserted, firstly, that the Judge loudly and
      discourteously, ordered the representative and  the  sponsor  to  "get
      back and wait until you are called in" when, having knocked the  door,
      they entered the  hearing  room  at  what  they  believed  to  be  the
      appointed time.  Secondly, it is alleged that at  the  outset  of  the
      hearing, the Judge -

           "....  waved a document saying in a sort of taunting manner 'you
           all say there was no appeal, here it is' and then  addressed  me
           saying 'This is  the  determination  of  the  2008  appeal',  as
           regards which I was not given the opportunity to read.  Mr Coyle
           [Respondent's representative] got up and gave me the copy as  it
           was not in the Respondent's bundle ....."

      Next, it is asserted  that  during  questioning  of  the  sponsor,  Mr
      Ashraf, by the Respondent's representative, the sponsor -


           "...... intimated something to the effect that he was aware that
           some appeal documents were served at their home but he  did  not
           know what had happened thereafter."

     Mr Bhatti's statement continues:

           "At this point, IJ  Gladstone  interjected  and  went  ballistic
           [sic] by asking the sponsor three times in a forceful voice with
           a scowl of disapproval on her face 'Why you did not say that  in
           a statement when the appeal was lodged? ....  Why didn't you put
           it in your statement?  ...   Why  didn't  you  put  it  in  your
           statement?' ...


           The environment in the Court room became toxic and outcome [sic]
           of the appeal absolutely predictable [sic] negative."

      Finally, there is an assertion that at the beginning  of  Mr  Bhatti's
      closing submissions, the Judge -


          ".....  ordered me in no uncertain terms 'You must  not  refer  to
      anything that is already  in the skeleton'".

      The  representative's  statement  embodies   the   following   omnibus
complaint:

           "Regrettably,  IJ  Gladstone's  decision  being   disrespectful,
           discourteous  and  intolerant  falls  well  short  of  the  high
           standards set by the Lord Chancellor and the Lord Chief  Justice
           respectively.  In this respect the misconduct of the  IJ  is  at
           issue."

   5.     The sponsor, Mr Ashraf, also  made  a  written  statement.  It  is
      evident from the terms thereof that this too was compiled  soon  after
      the hearing. It contains the following passages:

           "....   My  legal  representative,  Mr  Bhatti,  ...............
           knocked on the door and before he could enter he was told  in  a
           strongly harsh voice by a lady inside sitting at the  desk  'Get
           back and come in when you are called'."

      Mr Ashraf asserts that the  Judge,  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing,
      addressing him in "a very terse commanding voice".  He corroborates Mr
      Bhatti's claim that the Judge produced  a  copy  of  the  2008  appeal
      decision.  He confirms that, in response to questioning,  he  admitted
      to recalling the service of some papers at his family home -
          "But  [I]  know  nothing  more  what  had  happened  to  them  as,
          traditionally and culturally, it  is  the  oldest  member  of  the
          family who deals with all the matters and in this case it  was  my
          father who did whatever despite his ill health and I knew  nothing
          about the appeal."

     Mr Ashraf's statement continues:

           "The Immigration Judge interrupted by asking  me  in  an  almost
           shrieking and uncontrollable  rage  'If  you  knew  papers  were
           served on you, then why you did not say that when the appeal was
           lodged?' .....  I gave the reasons the best  I  could,  but  she
           would have none of it.  She kept screaming and  shouting  at  me
           with very  aggressive  and  agitated  tone  of  voice  and  kept
           repeating 'Why didn't  you  put  that  in  your  statement?'   I
           couldn't make out why she was shouting and bullying me .....


           She  definitely  seemed  terribly  irritated,   aggressive   and
           disrespectful to the point that I thought she was racist .....


           I am sure she will refuse the appeal as that is  quite  apparent
           from her aggressive attitude but this experience in  a  judicial
           environment leaves me baffled and confused."

      It is agreed that this statement also formed  part  of  the  materials
      considered at the permission to appeal stage.


   6.     At this juncture, it is appropriate to note  the  terms  in  which
      permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted:

           "The grounds contain a number of complaints about the  behaviour
           of the Judge in respect of the conduct of the hearing  which  it
           is suggested prevented the appeal from being properly presented.
             The  complaints  made  are   serious   and   justify   further
           investigation.  That is not to say the appeal  will  succeed  on
           its merits  but  the  grounds  raise  sufficient  concerns  that
           permission to appeal is granted."

     [My emphasis.]

     Accordingly, permission to appeal has been granted solely on the  basis
      of the conduct  of  the  hearing  at  first  instance.   Although  not
      articulated in this way, the substance of the grant of  permission  is
      that it is arguable that the Appellant was deprived of her right to  a
      fair hearing.

   7.     It is apparent  from  the  papers  that  the  various  claims  and
      assertions ventilated by Mr Bhatti and the sponsor are currently being
      processed under the formal judicial complaint procedures.  The hearing
      of this error of law appeal intervenes at a stage when  the  complaint
      process remains uncompleted.  I would emphasise that the sole question
      for this Tribunal is whether the decision of the FtT  is  vitiated  by
      error of law, within the compass of the grant of permission to appeal.
       This is not a judicial misconduct investigation or determination.

   8.     The available evidence includes a comprehensive response  compiled
      by the  Judge,  spanning  three  documents.   Whilst  it  is  somewhat
      unorthodox for the Upper Tribunal to receive a response from  the  FtT
      to the grounds of  appeal,  there  was  no  objection  to  this  being
      considered. Moreover, given the basis on which  permission  to  appeal
      was granted, I consider that this was appropriate in  this  particular
      case.  I  thus  consider  because  there  must  be  fairness  to  both
      protagonists viz the Appellant (on the one hand) and the Judge (on the
      other). Furthermore, this is not precluded by any rule of practice  or
      relevant principle.  Finally, this course has the important benefit of
      ensuring that this  Tribunal  determines  the  appeal  on  a  properly
      informed basis.

   9.     The FtT's response attaches the  Judge's  record  of  proceedings.
      This confirms that,  as  regards  the  conduct  of  the  hearing,  the
      following matters are not in dispute:

        i)    The Appellant's representative was not in possession  of  the
           2008 decision prior to the hearing.


       ii)    The Appellant's representative was first provided with a copy
           of this decision after the hearing had commenced.


      iii)    The representative  did  not  request  any  accommodation  or
           facilities, such as a brief adjournment and did  not  raise  any
           issue of being taken by surprise.


       iv)    In his closing submissions,  the  Appellant's  representative
           highlighted the late production of the 2008 decision.


        v)    The sponsor gave evidence at the hearing that the responsible
           family member concerning the 2008 process was  his  father.   He
           also attested to his  father's  ill  health,  asserting  that  a
           genuine error had been made in the visa application.


       vi)    The Judge stated to the Appellant's representative  that  the
           skeleton argument was not to be repeated  and  that  submissions
           were to focus on other matters.

  10.     At this juncture, it  is  appropriate  to  consider  the  sponsors
      written statement.  This was contained in a bundle  prepared  for  the
      first instance hearing and lodged  three  days  in  advance.   In  his
      statement, the sponsor describes himself as a British citizen by birth
      and states that he has been operating a busy take  away  food  outlet,
      the family business, for some years.  The sponsor is the nephew of the
      Appellant.  He confirms that  his  father,  then  ill,  had  acted  as
      sponsor in an application to bring the Appellant to the United Kingdom
      for a visit in 2008.  His statement continues

           "The Appellant's entry  clearance  application  was  refused  by
           Islamabad and my father suffered a stroke at the end of 2008 and
           his medical  condition  worsened  to  the  extent  that  he  was
           hospitalised ..... for 8 weeks.   In  view  of  his  health,  we
           didn't think it appropriate to put our father through the ordeal
           of an appeal even though, if we had appealed, it may  have  been
           allowed on compassionated grounds".

     Following this, the sponsor's wife and two of  their  children  visited
      the Appellant, who was then in Pakistan, in 2010.   Subsequently,  the
      Appellant went to live with a son in the USA.   She  is  now  aged  69
      years and in declining health.

  11.     This statement disclosed the Appellant's unsuccessful  application
      for  entry  clearance  in  2008,  thereby   confirming   the   factual
      correctness of the central reason for the ECOs later refusal  decision
      of 23 January 2013.  The sponsor's  statement  asserts  quite  clearly
      that there was no appeal against the 2008 refusal.  However,  this  is
      incorrect.  The appeal number is  VA/39169/2008  and  the  appeal  was
      dismissed by a determination of the FtT promulgated on 5 January 2009.
       This followed a hearing at which the Appellant was  not  represented.
      There was evidently some doubt about whether  the  appeal  was  to  be
      determined following an inter-partes hearing or on paper.  The  Judge,
      by the  terms  of  Determination,  clearly  gave  the  appeal  careful
      consideration before dismissing it for the reasons elaborated.

  12.     It is agreed that the document to which the Judge was referring at
      the outset of the hearing conducted on 15 August 2013 is  the  earlier
      FtT Determination of January 2009.   Certain  passages  in  the  FtT's
      determination have some bearing on this issue and others.  Firstly, it
      is apparent from paragraph [7] that the Appellant's representative was
      not, initially, in possession of  the  earlier  Determination.  It  is
      recorded that the representative "was provided with a copy".  I  shall
      return to this discrete issue as at a later stage.  In paragraph  [34]
      it is stated:

           "I indicated to Mr Bhatti that, on the basis of the  [sponsor's]
           statement, I did not expect a great deal of evidence  in  chief.
           However,  I  indicated  some   matters   on   which   I   sought
           clarification.  The sponsor gave unsworn evidence before  me  in
           English. I outlined the format of the hearing to him, I  advised
           the sponsor that  if  he  did  not  understand,  know,  hear  or
           remember anything, he should let me know. I also advised him  of
           my independence in the matter and [that] any questions raised by
           me were by way of clarification."


      Having  summarised  the  sponsor's  evidence  in   response   to   the
      Respondent's questioning, the Judge continued, in paragraph [42]:


           "Before asking the sponsor some questions, I reminded him of  my
           independence and the reason for my questions. I  note  that  the
           sponsor's evidence above was that he knew that there had been an
           appeal in 2008, but did not  know  if  it  had  gone  ahead.   I
           queried, therefore, why he had not said this in  his  statement.
           The sponsor told me that he did not know 100% if there had  been
           an appeal.  Again, I queried why he had not  said  this  in  his
           statement.  He told me that he should have done  so.   The  2008
           sponsor was living with this sponsor, at the  same  address,  in
           2008."

      In paragraph [46], the Judge directed  herself,  correctly,  that  the
      issue to be determined was whether there had been a deliberately false
      representation about the absence of any relevant previous  refusal  of
      entry to the United Kingdom in the completed application form.  In the
      paragraphs which follow, the  Judge  highlighted  certain  significant
      concerns and shortcomings pertaining to  the  appeal  materials.   The
      assessment undertaken in these passages is  commendably  detailed  and
      coherent.  This culminated in the  following  omnibus  conclusion,  in
      paragraph [67]:


           "... I cannot accept that so  many  false  representations  were
           made by way  of  innocent  misrepresentation.   I  am  therefore
           satisfied that the Appellant made  false  representations  under
           paragraph 320(7A) and  thus  refusal  of  her  application,  and
           appeal, is mandatory."


  13.     There are two discrete assertions in Mr Bhatti's statement which I
      would highlight.  The first is that, at the  hearing,  he  received  a
      copy of the January  2009  FtT  Determination  from  the  Respondent's
      representative.  Given his description of certain  surrounding  events
      at the hearing, this creates  a  negative  impression  of  the  Judge.
      However, this assertion has been demonstrated to be incorrect.  Having
      questioned Mr Bhatti  carefully  about  this  matter,  and  others,  I
      elicited from him that it was the  Judge,  and  not  the  Respondent's
      representative, who provided him this document.  This confirmation was
      provided by Mr Bhatti  after  he  had  initially  maintained  to  this
      Tribunal his assertion that the provider of the document was the other
      representative.   He  then  retracted  this   quite   abruptly,   when
      questioned about it.  The second noteworthy  feature  of  Mr  Bhatti's
      written statement sounding on this issue is the claim:

           "...... I was not given the opportunity to read [this  document]
           ...."




     This Tribunal's  questioning  of  Mr  Bhatti  confirmed  the  following
matters clearly:

        a)    Mr Bhatti did not request a pause or recess to  consider  the
           2009 FtT Determination.


        b)    He did not do so because he did not need to do  so:   he  was
           aware of what the document contained and represented.

        c)    He could have asked the  sponsor  questions  about  the  2009
           Determination and related issues, but chose not to do  so.   The
           Judge did not prevent him from asking such questions  either  in
           examination in chief or re-examination.

        d)    Everything contained in paragraphs 34 and 42 of  the  Judge's
           Determination is correct.

  14.     Mr Bhatti represented to this Tribunal that if  he  had  not  been
      flustered (as he claimed) he would have questioned the  sponsor  about
      the  family  business,  in  an  attempt  to  justify   the   sponsor's
      (undeniable) misstatement that there had been no  appeal  against  the
      2009 Determination.  Mr Bhatti was driven to agree, however, that  the
      sponsor's family business activities, coupled with his  personal  lack
      of involvement  in the unsuccessful  2008  application,  were  clearly
      expressed in his statement.  Furthermore, Mr Bhatti  did  not  suggest
      that the Judge failed to take this statement into  account.   Finally,
      he agreed with the verbatim record of the Judge's question to him

         "Do you have any re-examination Mr Bhatti?"

         It is unnecessary to elaborate at this juncture of the analysis.

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

  15.     In my opinion, this appeal raises two  distinct,  though  somewhat
      inter-related questions of law.  The first is  whether  the  Appellant
      had a fair hearing.  The second is whether the ultimate outcome of the
      hearing,  which  entailed  the  appeal  being  dismissed,   was   pre-
      determined, the product of a closed, prejudice on judicial mind.

  16.     I consider that three main principles are engaged.  The  first  is
      that every litigant has an inalienable right to a fair  hearing.   The
      second is that justice must not only be done but must  manifestly  and
      undoubtedly be seen  to  be  done.  The  third  is  the  principle  of
      impartial  judicial  adjudication,   one   facet   whereof   is   that
      prejudgement and predetermination are impermissible..  Linked to  this
      is the discrete judicial duty to consider the case made by all parties
      with an open mind. The first two of these principles  were  considered
      recently, in a different context, by the Upper Tribunal in Munir - v -
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKUT..  In paragraph
      [14] of that decision, this Tribunal stated:

           "[14]  The matrix  of  this  appeal,  rehearsed  above,  prompts
           reflection on the content and reach of one of  the  cornerstones
           of the common law, namely the right of every litigant to a  fair
           hearing. The right in play is properly described as fundamental,
           irreducible and inalienable."

     Four specific principles were then identified:

      (i) The defect, or impropriety, must be procedural in  nature.   Cases
           of this kind are not concerned with the merits of  the  decision
           under review or appeal.   Rather, the superior  court's  enquiry
           focuses on the  process,  or  procedure,  whereby  the  impugned
           decision was reached.


       ii)    It is doctrinally incorrect to adopt the two stage process of
           asking  whether  there  was   a   procedural   irregularity   or
           impropriety giving rise to unfairness and, if so,  whether  this
           had any material bearing on the outcome. These are, rather,  two
           elements  of  a  single  question,  namely  whether  there   was
           procedural unfairness.


      iii)    Thus, if  the  reviewing  or  appellate  Court  identifies  a
           procedural irregularity or impropriety which, in its view,  made
           no difference to the outcome, the appropriate conclusion is that
           there was no unfairness to the party concerned.


       iv)    The reviewing or appellate Court should exercise  caution  in
           concluding that the outcome would have  been  the  same  if  the
           diagnosed  procedural  irregularity  or  impropriety   had   not
           occurred.

     This Tribunal also noted the elevated degree of  importance  attributed
      to appearances in the context of every litigant's fair hearing rights.



  17.     As regards  the  third  of  the  principles  identified  above,  I
      consider that the enquiry conducted  by  the  appellate  or  reviewing
      court is not confined to issues of process or procedure.  Rather,  its
      purview extends to the  merits  of  the  first  instance  decision  or
      judgment.  I consider that to confine the enquiry to issues of process
      and procedure would be wrong in principle .  Both the  terms  and  the
      outcome of the judicial decision under review or appeal, together with
      other surrounding materials such as documentary evidence  and  written
      submissions,  all  considered  as  a  whole,  are  likely  to  provide
      indicators of whether the ground of appeal or  review  under  scrutiny
      has any merit or substance.

  18.     I conclude without  hesitation  that  the  Appellant  had  a  fair
      hearing before the  FtT.   Fundamentally,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant and his legal representative had a sufficient opportunity to
      put forward their case.  This conclusion is based on a combination  of
      my assessment of the totality of the materials which I have considered
      and the representations made to this Tribunal by Mr  Bhatti,  together
      with the material  facts  relating  to  the  conduct  of  the  initial
      hearing, as rehearsed above.  In this context, I refer to, but do  not
      repeat, paragraphs [3] - [13] hereof thus the first ground  of  appeal
      fails.

  19.     As regards the second of the central issues of law  which  I  have
      identified, I have considered the determination in isolation from  the
      Judge's subsequent responses.  Disregarding  these  entirely,  I  find
      that  the  determination  manifestly  confounds  any   suggestion   of
      unfairness to the Appellant.  It is a carefully compiled, impressively
      detailed and logically persuasive judgment.  It is, demonstrably,  the
      work of a conscientious, industrious, impartial and independent Judge.
       It comfortably withstands the detailed scrutiny to which it has  been
      subjected in this  appeal  process.   It  gives  rise  to  no  lurking
      suspicion of predetermination or prejudgment of any discrete issue  or
      the outcome.  The second main ground of appeal fails accordingly.

  20.     The outstanding complaint against the Judge will be determined  by
      those charged with the responsibility of doing so. This  Tribunal  has
      no function or responsibility in the complaint process. I  trust  that
      the swift production of this judgment will  expedite  finalisation  of
      this latter exercise.

DECISION

  21.     I dismiss the appeal.  The decision of the FtT is hereby affirmed.





                                                      [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 12 February 2014

















