
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/04174/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15 June 2015                       |                  On 3 July 2015      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                        Karthik Rajaraman Saraswathy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer - chennai

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Rajaraman (sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Karthik Rajaraman Saraswathy, was born on  11  September
    1988 and is a citizen of India.  He has applied for entry clearance  to
    the United Kingdom as a visitor.  His application was  refused  by  the
    ECO (Entry  Clearance  Officer)  at  Chennai  on  23  July  2014.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Oakley) which in a
    determination determined on the papers 16 January 2015,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Judge Oakley's determination is flawed by legal error.  At the date  of
    his decision, there was no basis on which the appellant could appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal under the Immigration  Rules,  the  only  basis
    upon which Judge Oakley has determined this appeal.  The decision makes
    no mention of the appeal on human rights and/or race relations grounds.
     I am,  therefore,  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is flawed by legal error and have remade the decision.

 3.  I  do  not  find  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  has   racially
    discriminated against the appellant.  The decision was  purely  on  the
    basis  that  the  appellant,  having  made  an  application  to  settle
    permanently in the United Kingdom in June 2013 (which had been  refused
    and a subsequent appeal dismissed), it was likely  that  the  appellant
    was not a genuine visitor to the United Kingdom and would not return at
    the end of his proposed visit.  I appreciate  that  the  appellant  may
    have experienced feelings of isolation and alienation as a  consequence
    of the immigration  decision,  but  that  does  not  amount  to  racial
    discrimination.

 4. The remaining ground is under Article 8 ECHR.  I acknowledge that it is
    unusual where an entry clearance case can succeed under Article 8 where
    it has not succeeded under the Immigration Rules.  I am aware, however,
    that the duty rests on the United Kingdom  Government  to  promote  (as
    opposed to  refraining  from  interfering  with)  the  family  life  of
    individuals where  Article  8  is  engaged.   Mrs  Pettersen,  for  the
    respondent, was right to point out that the appellant is an adult as is
    his sponsor and sister, Mrs Rajaraman.  However, this is to ignore  the
    fact that the appellant is autistic and has learning  difficulties.   I
    was very impressed by Mrs Rajaraman and what she  said  to  me  at  the
    Upper Tribunal  hearing.   I  consider  it  likely  that  there  is  an
    especially strong bond  and  (manifest  when  he  is  in  his  sister's
    presence) a tie of emotional dependency between the appellant  and  Mrs
    Rajaraman.  The appellant and Mrs Rajaraman's mother has died  and  the
    appellant is cared for in India by their father who is  not  always  in
    good health.  I find that Article 8 as regards family life  is  engaged
    although the appellant may only succeed if he can show  the  importance
    and strength of that family life to render the  decision  to  deny  him
    entry clearance disproportionate when considered in the  light  of  the
    public interest concerned with denying him entry clearance.  It is here
    that the reason used by the Entry Clearance Officer  for  refusing  the
    application under the Immigration Rules (i.e. that  the  appellant  had
    applied for permanent residence and was therefore not likely  to  leave
    the United Kingdom at the end of his visit) is a factor which  must  be
    considered in the proportionality "balancing" exercise.  However, it is
    not, in this instance, a factor which  I  find  should  strengthen  the
    weight given to the  public  interest  given  that  the  appellant  has
    visited the  United  Kingdom  on  numerous  occasions  and  has  always
    returned to India and, most significantly, has done so twice  following
    Judge Turnock's decision to dismiss the permanent residence  appeal  in
    2013.  As Mrs Rajaraman pointed out,  had  the  appellant  intended  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, then he would have  done  so  on  one  of
    those occasions.  Bearing that in mind and acknowledging that these are
    unusual circumstances and having regard also to all the evidence, I  am
    satisfied that the promotion of family life between the  appellant  and
    his sister in the United Kingdom is  of  such  importance  that,  taken
    together with the appellant's previous exemplary conduct during  visits
    to this country,  it  outweighs  the  public  interest  concerned  with
    denying him  entry  clearance  and  renders  the  immigration  decision
    disproportionate.  I therefore allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

 5. However, as I pointed out to Mrs Rajaraman, I am allowing the appeal on
    the basis of my assessment that the appellant will return to  India  at
    the end of his visit.  If he chooses to remain in the United Kingdom as
    an overstayer, it is very unlikely indeed that he will succeed  in  any
    application he may make to the Secretary of State or in any  subsequent
    appeal.  Such a course  of  action  would  also  inevitably  cause  the
    appellant  and  his  family  a  great  deal  of  unnecessary  distress.
    Furthermore, I am satisfied that Mrs Rajaraman is aware  that,  if  her
    father is unable to cope with looking after the appellant in  years  to
    come, she will have to make arrangements in India and certainly  cannot
    rely on any assumption that the appellant would  then  be  admitted  to
    live with her permanently in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  I  have
    determined, for the purpose of this appeal that it is likely  that  the
    appellant will return to India following his visit to his sister.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 16 January  2015
is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  This appeal is allowed on  human
rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2 July 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

