

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/04435/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 2 September 2016                        |On 14 September 2016           |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                          THE VISA OFFICER (ACCRA)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR ESOE BOLDWIN MOLIKA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    There is no need for any order restricting publication  of  any  facts
relating to this case and I make no order.

2.    The appellant, hereinafter  "the  visa officer",  has  permission  to
appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow  the  appeal  of  the
respondent  hereinafter  "the  claimant",  against   a   decision   of   the
Visa Officer  of  29 June 2014  refusing  him  entry  clearance  to  the
United Kingdom for the purpose of a family visit.  He had said he wanted to
visit his adult brother and his brother's family as well  as  to  relax,  do
some sightseeing and meet some family friends.  The  Visa Officer,  though,
had refused the  application,  not  being  satisfied  that  various  of  the
requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395)  had  been
met.  In particular, the Visa Officer was not satisfied that  the  claimant
intended a visit for a limited period  as  indicated  by  him,  or  that  he
intended to leave the UK at the end of the period of the visit  or  that  he
would be adequately maintained and accommodated in the UK or that  he  would
be able to meet the cost of his return or onward travel.

3.    When the decision of the visa officer was issued, it was explained to
the appellant that  his  rights  of  appeal  were  limited  to  the  grounds
referred to in section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
Act 2002.  That is to say he could only pursue an appeal  on  human  rights
grounds and/or on grounds of unlawful discrimination.  Whilst  taking  issue
with the visa officer's conclusions with respect to the  Immigration Rules
he also made it clear he was appealing  on  human  rights  grounds.   In  so
doing he indicated that he  wanted  his  appeal  to  be  considered  on  the
papers.

4.    The appeal was considered by a judge of the  First-tier Tribunal,  on
the papers, on 21 December 2015.  The Judge found, contrary to the view of
the Visa Officer,  that  the  claimant  met  all  of  the  requirements  of
paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  Mindful that, despite that, if the
appeal were to succeed it had to do so on human rights  grounds,  the Judge
said this:

      "     7.   As stated  above,  my  jurisdiction  is  limited  to  human
      rights (Article 8 ECHR-family and private life) and  race  relations.
      The approach to such appeals is as set out in Mostafa  (Article 8  in
      entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT 00112  (IAC),  Adeji  (visit  visas -
      Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC),  Abbasi  and  Another  (visits -
      bereavement - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463 and Kaur (visit appeals;
      Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487  (IAC).   The  starting  point  is  the
      evidence of the appellant's ability to meet the Rules.  I  have  found
      that the appellant meets the Rules.  The  appellant  and  sponsor  are
      close relatives.  The grounds of appeal stated that the appellant  was
      very close to his brother and that the visit was for the  purposes  of
      encouraging family reunion.  As in Kaur I am satisfied that  there  is
      family life between them for  the  purposes  of  Article 8  which  is
      deserving of respect and which the decision  interferes  with.   I  am
      satisfied that the appellant is a genuine visitor  who  is  likely  to
      return to Cameroon after a short visit to the UK.  The Rules recognise
      the importance of family life by making provision for family visits to
      the UK conditional on meeting their  requirements.   The  respondent's
      decision  is  not  lawful  because  the  appellant  meets  the  Rules.
      Although the appellant and the sponsor can continue their relationship
      as at present or by visits to Cameroon or elsewhere I  find  that  the
      decision  is  not  proportionate  to  the   interests   of   effective
      immigration control and the public interest taking  into  account  the
      factors in s117B of the 2002 Act.  The appeal is allowed on Article 8
      human rights grounds."

5.    That was not the end of the matter because the respondent applied  for
and obtained permission to appeal.  In a nutshell, the grounds were  to  the
effect that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  failing  to  explain  its
conclusion that there was family life such that Article 8 was  engaged  and
in failing to explain why the refusal of entry clearance and any  consequent
interference with Article 8 rights had been  disproportionate.   Permission
to appeal was granted by a different judge  of  a  First-tier Tribunal  who
said this:

      "     5.   It is arguable that the  judge  when  finding  that  family
      life exists has failed to  give  adequate  reasons  in  light  of  the
      established case law cited by the respondent in the grounds of  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal.

            6.   It is  arguable  that  the  proportionality  assessment  is
      inadequate; it does not explain why the refusal of a visa  which  only
      allows the parties to be together temporarily  is  a  disproportionate
      interference with Article 8 rights.  It is arguable that the judge has
      not adequately explained how the appellant has demonstrated  that  the
      interference with his right to family and/or private  life,  resulting
      from the refusal, has given rise to  such  grave  consequences  as  to
      engage Article 8.  Further, the respondent appropriately contends that
      failed  (sic)  to  have  regard  to  the  statutory  'public  interest
      considerations' as required by section 117B NIA 2002."

6.    Permission  having  been  granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) convened for the purpose of considering  whether
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did contain an error of law and, if
so, what should flow from that.  Directions anticipated that  in  the  event
of the decision being set aside remaking of the decision  would  take  place
at the same hearing.  Indeed, that is what happened.

7.    The hearing was attended by Mr Bates on behalf of the  Visa Officer.
The claimant, of course, being out of the country was unable to attend,  but
his UK based sponsor did not attend  either  and  he  was  not  represented.
Mr Bates, essentially, relied upon the points which had been  made  in  the
grounds of application and  the  grant  of  permission  with  an  additional
contention that the First-tier Tribunal  had  appeared  to  rely  on  post-
decision events with respect to its analysis under  the  Immigration Rules.
I did point out, though, that that could not be  a  point  relevant  to  the
error of law issue, absent leave to amend the grounds of  appeal  which  was
not applied for, because it had not been relied upon earlier.

8.    In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to adequately
explain its conclusion that there was family life between the  claimant  and
his UK based brother such that the decision to refuse  entry  clearance  had
resulted in a breach of rights under Article 8 of the  European  Convention
on Human Rights ("ECHR").  It has clearly been established, in  the  context
of adult relationships, that family life between adults does not come  about
or  exist  solely  because  of   the   actual   family   relationship.    In
Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and MS (Article 8 - family  life -
dependency - proportionality) Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00064 it was stated that
there would normally need to be some  element  of  dependency  or  something
going beyond normal emotional ties between adult relatives for  family  life
within the meaning of Article 8 to exist.  It is also  important  to  point
out, though, that in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)  [2012]
UKUT 00160 (IAC) it was said that there was no general rule that Article 8
could never be engaged when family life was said to  have  been  established
between adult siblings.  Nevertheless, here there was no  evidence  as  such
that the relationship between the claimant and his UK based brother  was  of
a close nature other than a mere brief  and  unexplained  assertion  in  the
grounds of appeal to that effect.  I have no  difficulty  at  all  with  the
proposition that family life  can  be  established  between  adult  siblings
living in different  countries  but,  given  the  paucity  of  the  material
suggesting such was  the  case  here,  I  have  concluded  that  the  First-
tier Tribunal did not adequately explain its favourable finding,  from  the
claimant's prospective, in  that  regard.   I  appreciate  it  was  in  some
difficulty because it had been asked to decide the appeal on the papers  and
it had not been supplied with witness statements or the like addressing  the
nature,  depth  and  substance  of  the  relationship   between   the   two.
Nevertheless, if it was to find in the claimant's favour in that  regard  it
had to properly justify why it was so doing.  Of course,  if  it  felt  that
there was insufficient material for it to resolve matters  one  way  or  the
other and if it felt it was proportionate to do so, it could have  adjourned
with directions for there to  be  an  oral  hearing  (which  presumably  the
sponsor would have been able to attend) or  for  the  provision  of  witness
statements.

9.    In view of the above error of law I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal.  I now move to remaking.

10.   Essentially, Mr Bates points relevant to remaking were  the  same  as
those upon which he had sought to rely in persuading me  that  the  decision
ought to be set aside.  I have nothing from  the  claimant  or  the  sponsor
which was not before the  First-tier Tribunal.   On  the  limited  material
before me I conclude that it has not been shown that there  is  family  life
between the claimant and the sponsor with the consequence that  it  has  not
been shown that the refusal of entry  clearance  has  led  to  a  breach  of
Article 8 rights.  I would stress that I am very  far  indeed  from  saying
that these sorts of applications and appeals cannot  succeed  on  Article 8
grounds it is simply that here  there  was  no  evidential  basis  for  this
application or appeal to succeed on Article 8  grounds.   In  remaking  the
decision, therefore, I dismiss the appellant's appeal against  the  decision
of the Visa Officer of 29 June 2014.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law and is set aside.

In remaking the decision I dismiss the appeal of the  claimant  against  the
visa officer's decision of  29 June 2014  refusing  to  grant  him  entry
clearance.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                            Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway    14 September 2016



To The Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award.


Signed                            Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway    14 September 2016

