
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/04484/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 21st August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        OGHENERUKEVBE SHARLYN WILCOX
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Onoyivbe, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

1.   This is an appeal on behalf of an Entry Clearance Officer  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen, sitting on 23 April  2015,
    who allowed Ms Wilcox's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 14 July 2014 to refuse her entry clearance as a
    visitor.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction
    and there was nothing before me to suggest that  Ms  Wilcox  should  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings.  For  the  purposes  of  this
    decision I refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2.   In summary, the Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 14 May  1978.
     She is the youngest of eight siblings and has 5 siblings together with
    nieces and nephews in the UK whom she wishes to  visit.  The  Appellant
    made her application in July 2014.

3.   On 19 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  granted  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer permission to appeal on the basis  that  the  grounds
    were arguable.  The grounds argued that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    allowing the Appellant's appeal under  the  immigration  rules  as  the
    appellant had only a limited right of appeal.

Error of Law

4.   On 25 June 2013 section 52  of  the  Crime  and  Courts  Act  2006  was
    commenced.  This restricted appeal rights for visitors seeking to visit
    family members in the UK and the restrictions apply to any applications
    made on or after 25 June 2013.   The  Crimes  and  Courts  Act  amended
    section 88A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  to
    remove the right  of  appeal  for  persons  visiting  specified  family
    members.  However appeals are still permitted  under  section  84(1)(b)
    and (c) of the 2002 Act, namely on  human  rights  and  race  relations
    grounds. As no grounds were pleaded by the  Appellant  in  relation  to
    race relations the only ground on which she could ever  have  succeeded
    was on the ground that the refusal to issue her  with  entry  clearance
    breached her rights under Article 8, ECHR.

5.   Accordingly the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under  the  immigration  rules  was  vitiated  by  a
    material error of law such that it must be set aside and remade.

Remaking of the Decision

6.    For  the  purposes  of  remaking  the  decision,  I   heard   detailed
    submissions from Ms Onoyivbe, who relied on the bundle before the First-
    tier Tribunal, including witness statements from the Appellant as  well
    as the Appellant's (and indeed the sponsor's) siblings  (together  with
    various other documents  and  the  sponsor's  skeleton  argument.   The
    sponsor had also produced a  reply  to  the  Respondent's  grounds  for
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal).  A number of  the  Appellant's  siblings
    were in Court before me and available to  give  evidence.   However  Ms
    Fijiwala indicated that she did not wish to cross-examine any of  these
    witnesses and it was  agreed  that  their  statements  would  stand  in
    evidence.  I have carefully taken into account, in the round,  all  the
    evidence before me, even if not specifically referred to below.

7.   Ms Fijiwala relied on Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015]  UKUT  261
    (IAC) which clarified that the first question to  be  addressed  in  an
    appeal against refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where only
    human rights grounds are applicable, is whether article 8 is engaged at
    all.  If it is not 'which will  not  infrequently  be  the  case',  the
    Tribunal has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the  entry
    clearance officer's decision under the immigration  rules  and  'should
    not do so'.  Only if Article 8 is engaged, may  the  Tribunal  need  to
    look at the extent to which the claimant is said to have failed to meet
    the requirements of the  immigration  rules  as  that  may  inform  the
    proportionality  balancing  exercise.   Adjei  confirmed  that  Mostafa
    (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) was not  authority
    for any contrary proposition.  In addition:

         "As compliance with para 41 of HC 395 is not a ground of appeal  to
         be decided by the Tribunal, any findings concerning that will carry
         little weight, especially if based upon arguments advanced only  by
         the appellant.  If the appellant were to make a  fresh  application
         for entry clearance the ECO will,  if  requested  to  do  so,  have
         regard to the assessment carried out by the judge but will  not  be
         bound by those findings to treat the appellant as a person who,  at
         least at the date of the appeal hearing, met  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 41."

8.   Ms Fijiwala submitted that the relationship between the  Appellant  and
    the sponsor and her extended family in the UK did not amount to  family
    life and she submitted that Article 8 was not engaged.

9.   Ms Onoyivbe detailed submissions included reliance on  Mostafa  (above)
    and she referred me to the evidence that she submitted showed that  the
    Appellant met the requirements of the immigration rules.   Ms  Onoyivbe
    insisted that the  family  were  very  close  relatives  and  that  the
    decision should be remade in the Appellant's  favour  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

10.  I have reminded myself of paragraph 24 of  the  Presidential  panel  in
    Mostafa which, as pointed out in Adjei, made clear that it was  dealing
    with a very narrow range of claimants, who might attract the protection
    of Article 8(1):

         "... In practical terms it is likely to be limited to  cases  where
         the relationship is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life
         partners or a parent and minor child and  even  then  it  will  not
         necessarily be extended to cases where, for example,  the  proposed
         visit is based on a whim or will not add significantly to the  time
         that the people involved spend together."

11.  Although I have reminded myself that the  Tribunal  in  Mostafa  stated
    that they were not suggesting that other kinds of  relationships  would
    never come within the scope of Article 8(1) I am not satisfied that the
    case of this Appellant engages Article 8.

12.  Although I accept that the evidence before me paints  a  picture  of  a
    family that stays in touch and where the UK based  relatives  are  very
    anxious to see the Appellant (and I note that in Court before me I  was
    referred to one of the Appellant's sisters who is also based in Nigeria
    and who is currently based in the UK) I am not satisfied  that  it  has
    been demonstrated that they enjoy  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8(1).  The ties between the Appellant and the sponsor  and  the
    extended family of siblings and nieces and nephews does not  go  beyond
    the normal emotional ties to be expected  between  adult  siblings  and
    their offspring.  The Appellant is 37 years old  and  is  a  lawyer  in
    Nigeria  and  is  married  and  in  employment  there.   There  is   no
    relationship of dependency either by the Appellant on  the  sponsor  or
    any of her relatives in the UK, or vice versa.

13.  It is a question of  fact  in  each  case  whether  such  relationships
    disclose sufficiently strong ties such that they fall within the  scope
    of Article 8(1).  However, as noted above the appellant has established
    her own family and private life in Nigeria, as has her  adult  siblings
    in the UK.  The adult family has lived  apart  for  a  reasonably  long
    period of time and although various members of  the  family  appear  to
    have  visited  Nigeria,  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  dependency,
    financial or otherwise, during this period.  It is established law that
    there must be more than normal emotional ties  in  these  circumstances
    for family life to exist for the purposes of Article 8(1) of the  ECHR:
    Kugathas [2003] EWC Civ 31.

14.  In my findings in this case there is no family life, for  the  purposes
    of Article 8(1).  In respect of private  life  any  interference  as  a
    result of the refusal of entry clearance does not have consequences  of
    such gravity as to potentially  engage  the  operation  of  Article  8,
    either by reference to the  family  lives  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    sponsor and the extended family,  or  by  reference  to  their  private
    lives.  Therefore the question of proportionality and the issue of  the
    Appellant meeting the requirements of the immigration rules,  does  not
    arise before me.

15.  For these reasons I allow the appeal of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.
    The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to allow the  appeal  under
    the  immigration  rules.   I  remake  the   decision   dismissing   the
    Appellant's appeal against refusal of entry clearance.

Notice of Decision

16.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made  an  error  of  law  and  his
    decision to allow the appeal  is  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh
    decision to dismiss the appeal.


Signed   Date: 19 August 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As this is the Secretary of State's successful appeal, there can be  no  fee
award.


Signed   Date: 19 August 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

