
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05352/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th February 2016                         |On 7th July 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                 (PAKISTAN)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                           MISS SYEDA MARIAM ZAHRA
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, instructed by M. K. Suri & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas,  Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1.  This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Amin promulgated on 13th August  2015  in  which  she
       allowed an appeal against a decision made  by  the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer on 21st July 2014 refusing the  application  made  by  Syeda
       Mariam Zahra for entry clearance as a family visitor.


    2. The appellant before me is the Entry Clearance Officer. However, for
       ease of reference, in the course of this decision I shall adopt  the
       parties' status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  shall,
       in this decision, refer to Miss Zahra as the appellant and the Entry
       Clearance Officer as the respondent.


    3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 13th February 1998.
        She is the daughter of Mr Ijaz Hussain and Mrs Syeda Ijaz, both  of
       whom are Pakistani nationals who visited the UK  in  2013  and  have
       remained in the UK  since.  During  their  visit,  Mr  Ijaz  Hussain
       suffered a  heart  attack  and  was  admitted  to  hospital  for  an
       emergency Angioplasty.


    4.  On 30th June 2014 the appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  to
       travel to the UK for a period of 8 weeks to  see  her  father.   The
       appellant had  previously  been  refused  entry  clearance  on  15th
       January 2013.  Having considered her application the respondent  was
       not satisfied that the appellant is seeking entry to  the  UK  as  a
       visitor and that she intended to leave the UK  at  the  end  of  the
       proposed visit.  The application was refused and it was that refusal
       that gave rise to the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  on  the
       limited ground that the decision was unlawful under s6 Human  Rights
       Act 1998.


    5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence  from  the  appellant's
       sister and brother-in-law.  That evidence is recorded at  paragraphs
       [6] to [19] of the decision.  The Judge's findings  and  conclusions
       are to be found at paragraphs [21] to [43] of the  decision.   I  do
       not set them out in full in this decision, but I  have  had  careful
       regard to them.  Suffice it to say that the  Judge  found  both  the
       appellant's sister and  brother-in-law  to  be  credible  witnesses:
       [22].  The Judge found, at paragraph [23] that Article 8 is  engaged
       and that there is a close relationship between the appellant and her
       father that constitutes family life.  The Judge found, at  paragraph
       [38] that any interference will have consequences of such gravity as
       potentially to engage the  operation  of  Article  8  and  that  the
       interference is in accordance with the law.


    6. The focus of the Judge's conclusions was essentially stages iv)  and
       v) of the five stage test set out in Razgar (2004) UKHL 27, that  is
       referred to by the Judge at paragraph [25] of her decision.  To that
       end, the Judge states:


         "38. The interference is in accordance with the law but I  am  not
             satisfied that it is necessary on any of the grounds cited  in
             question four above.


         39.  I have taken into consideration at this second stage the fact
             that the Appellant has met the Immigration Rules and  she  has
             not undermined the dignity of  the  UK's  immigration  system.
             The only issue in the refusal  was  that  her  visit  was  not
             considered to be genuine.     I  have  taken  account  of  the
             family's impeccable immigration history from past visits apart
             from her father and mother who have had to remain  in  the  UK
             due  to  the  father's  unexpected  and  sudden  illness.  The
             Appellant herself also previously came to the UK and  returned
             home with her parents. Her aunt and uncle  have  also  visited
             and returned after their visit.


         40.  The ability to meet the immigration rules is a weighty  issue
             but I am aware that it is  not  a  determinative  factor  when
             deciding whether the refusal is proportionate.     I also find
             it is not proportionate to the legitimate public aim.


         41.  My reasons for this are that the  Appellant  is  in  a  close
             relationship with her father. She was 15 years  old  when  she
             last saw her father. She is now 17 years old.


         42.  In the two years that have passed  her  father's  health  has
             deteriorated and her health as a result has also deteriorated.
               The Appellant has strong ties in  Pakistan,  not  least  her
             continuing education and her family (uncle and brother).


         43.  In all the circumstances, I conclude  that  the  interference
             with the  Appellant's  family  life   (Article   8)   by   the
             refusal  of temporary   entry   is   disproportionate  in  the
             circumstances."


The grounds of appeal


    7. In the grounds of appeal the  respondent  contends  that  the  Judge
       erroneously failed to take into account  the  evidence  before  her,
       that the appellant's parents are both living with the sponsor in the
       UK without any valid leave, when stating as she  does  at  paragraph
       [32] that  "..I  also  recognise  with  some  force  the  impeccable
       immigration history of the sponsor and family who  has  visited  the
       UK.  All  of  them  have  returned   back   after   their   visit.".
       Furthermore, the Judge erred in her  assessment  of  proportionality
       because  refusal  is  justified  in  the  interests   of   effective
       immigration control.  Finally, it is said that the  Judge  erred  in
       finding at paragraph [34] of her decision that Skype  and  telephone
       calls are not sufficient to  'maintain  the  family  life  that  the
       appellant clearly enjoys with her father.' It is said  that  on  the
       evidence, it is far from clear that the appellant enjoys family life
       with her father, or that his medical condition is such  to  preclude
       communication via telephone or Skype.


    8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin  on
       11th December 2015.  The matter comes before me to  consider  whether
       or not the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Amin  involved  the
       making of a material error of law, and if the decision is set  aside,
       to re-make the decision.


    9. Before me, Mr Kotas conceded, rightly in my view, that the first and
       second  grounds of appeal that I have identified  above,  amount  to
       nothing more than a disagreement with findings that were open to the
       Judge.  He also accepts, again rightly in my view, that at the  time
       of the respondent's decision to refuse the appellant Entry Clearance
       (21st July  2014)  the  appellant's  parents  were  not  in  the  UK
       unlawfully.  They had in fact applied on 20th June 2013 for leave to
       remain in the UK on discretionary grounds following the heart attack
       suffered by the appellant's father  in  May  2013.   A  decision  to
       refuse the applications was  made  on  14th  October  2014  and  the
       appeals  were  not  determined  until  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Eban promulgated on 9th  October  2014.   Until  that
       time,  they  had  the  benefit  of  leave  in  accordance  with  s3C
       Immigration Act 1971.


   10. Mr Kotas submits that the appellant's parents have no desire at  all
       to return to Pakistan and it is plain that they wish  to  remain  in
       the UK.  He refers me to paragraphs [22] and [23] of the decision of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Eban in the appellant's  parents'  appeal,
       in which it is recorded that the appellant's parents  want  to  make
       their life in the UK.  The appellant's father is said to be "...a 63
       year old man who now wants to stay in the  UK  so  that  he  can  be
       looked after by his daughter  and  benefit  from  medical  treatment
       here. He has serious health problems and takes medication.".


   11. On behalf of the appellant Mr Jones  submits  that  the  submissions
       relied upon by Mr Kotas before me, do not arise from the grounds  of
       appeal advanced by the  respondent  in  writing.   He  submits  that
       whilst the extracts from the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Eban might suggest that the appellant's parents' want to  remain  in
       the UK, that desire only arises because of the unfortunate  turn  in
       the health of the appellant's father. He submits that  it  is  plain
       that the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Amin  that  is  the
       subject of the appeal before me, proceeded with  the  Judge  knowing
       that it was the health of the appellant's father, that prevents  her
       parents from returning to Pakistan.  Mr Jones submits  that  all  of
       the grounds of appeal advanced on behalf of the  respondent   amount
       to nothing more than a disagreement with findings that were properly
       open to the Judge.   He submits that the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge is factually  accurate,  and  discloses  no  material
       error of law.


   12. The issue for me to decide is whether or not the Judge  was  entitled
       to conclude, as she did, that the interference with  the  appellant's
       family  life?(Article  8)  by  the  refusal  of  temporary  entry  is
       disproportionate, in the circumstances.


   13. In that respect I follow the guidance of the Court of Appeal in  R  &
       ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal held that
       a finding might only be set aside for error of law on the grounds  of
       perversity if it was irrational or  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury
       sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.  A finding
       that  is  "perverse"  embraces  findings  that  are   irrational   or
       unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, and findings of fact  that  are
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal
       should not overturn a judgment at first instance,  unless  it  really
       could not understand the original judge's thought process when he was
       making material findings. I apply that guidance to  my  consideration
       of the decision in this appeal.


   14. Having carefully read the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       and her reasons for allowing the appeal, I reject the submission that
       the decision discloses a material error of  law  as  claimed  by  the
       respondent.  In my judgement, it was open to the Judge on the unusual
       and  particular  facts  of  this  appeal,  to   conclude   that   the
       interference with the appellant's family life is disproportionate  in
       the circumstances.  Another Judge might not have  reached  that  same
       conclusion but that is not to say that the finding made by the  Judge
       was irrational or unreasonable in the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.  The Judge reached her  findings  having
       had careful regard to the evidence before  her  of  the  relationship
       between the appellant and her father  and  the  evidence  before  the
       Tribunal as to the health of the appellant's father and his inability
       to travel to Pakistan.


   15. It follows that in  my  judgment  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge does not disclose a material error  of  law  and  the
       appeal is dismissed.


 Notice of Decision


   16. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge stands.


   17. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.


   18. At the end of the hearing before me, Mr Jones submitted that  in  the
       event that the appeal is dismissed, the appellant would wish to  make
       representations as to costs.  It is of course open to  the  appellant
       to make an application for costs under Rule  10(5)  and  (6)  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  ("the  2008  Rules"),
       but the Tribunal may not  make  an  order  in  respect  of  costs  or
       expenses  except  if  the  Tribunal  considers  that  a  party,   the
       respondent here, has acted unreasonably in  bringing  the  appeal  or
       conducting the proceedings.  I do not pre-empt any  decision  that  I
       may in due course need to make, but I do remind  the  appellant  that
       although the appeal has ultimately failed, permission to  appeal  was
       granted by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, who  observed  that  it  is
       arguable that the Judge erred in her approach to Article 8.   If  any
       application for costs is made, I direct  that  the  respondent  shall
       serve any submissions in reply, within 14 days, and  the  application
       shall then be determined by me, on the papers.


Signed                                  Date: 7th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
