

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05772/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Sheldon Court                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 13th June 2013                           |On : 24th May 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                                khaled hussen

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Dacca

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The decision under appeal in the instant case was taken by the  ECO  on
    28th December 2011, and not on 13th May 2011, as appears in the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination.  The latter date was actually  given  by
    the Entry Clearance Manager when he reviewed  the  decision,  following
    the arrival of the appeal papers on  2nd  April  2012.   No  doubt  the
    intended date was 13th May 2012.

2.    The application for a 'family visit' visa and  the  subsequent  appeal
    are notable for the volume of documentation  provided  by  the  British
    Immigration  Advisory  Service,  a  firm  operating  in  Sylhet.    The
    application was  initially  refused  because,  although  the  UCB  bank
    statements provided by Mr Hussen had a closing balance on 27th November
    2011 of Taka 2,39,529/-, this figure was  made  up  largely  of  recent
    deposits, which  were  not  consistent  with  the  applicant's  monthly
    income.  Mr Hussen was  said  to  derive  additional  income  from  his
    father's land, but the documents provided did not  demonstrate  whether
    any income was derived from the land or how many members of the  family
    were supported therefrom.

3.   A bundle comprising the documents previously submitted and a number  of
    fresh documents, such as cash memos from Emran Auto Rice Mill, was sent
    out with the notice of appeal, and was carefully reviewed by the  Entry
    Clearance Manager.   This  review  is  very  thorough,  traversing  the
    documents in respect  of  the  family  farm  and  the  appellant's  two
    businesses, Khaled Poultry Firm and Khaled  Enterprise.   There  is  no
    need for me to set out the review here.  I would only comment  that  it
    is very  far  from  the  perfunctory  'rubber-stamping'  of  the  ECO's
    decision which characterizes many of the ECM reviews which I have  seen
    over the  years.   On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  most  detailed  and
    painstaking assessment which I have ever seen in an ECM  review.   With
    respect, it addresses the documentary evidence far more thoroughly than
    did the First-tier Tribunal, and gives cogent reasons for upholding the
    ECO's decisions.

4.    The  only  advantage  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  was   the
    attendance at the hearing on 25th July  2012  of  the  sponsor,  Sheikh
    Mohammed Bashir Uddin, whose evidence is recorded rather confusingly at
    paragraph 12 of Judge Wilbert Harris' determination.  The pronouns 'he'
    and 'his' are used in such a way as to be unclear whether the appellant
    or the sponsor is being referred to.  What Judge  Harris  made  of  the
    oral evidence was that the sponsor had adequate accommodation in  which
    to put up the appellant, but  that  he  was  "not  satisfied  that  the
    Sponsor intends to invite the Appellant to  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
    visit as claimed."  This suggested to  me,  when  the  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was renewed by  the  British
    Immigration  Advisory  Service  ~  having  initially  been  refused  by
    Designated Judge Wilson ~ that Judge Harris thought the sponsor  to  be
    complicit in a scheme to bring the appellant to the United Kingdom  for
    a purpose other than a  genuine  visit.   I  granted  leave  to  appeal
    because of my concerns over this.

5.   The ECO had not made  such  a  suggestion.   Rather,  the  age  of  the
    sponsor's documents provided with the application suggested to the  ECO
    that Mr Hussen did not have a real sponsor at all.  I can  see  nothing
    in the sponsor's evidence to support the judge's view.  I  assume  that
    the judge inferred, from his finding that the appellant did not  intend
    a genuine visit, that the sponsor must be aware that the appellant  did
    not intend a genuine  visit.   That  inference,  of  course,  does  not
    logically follow.  The sponsor did not,  however,  attend  the  hearing
    before me, despite notice of today's hearing being  sent  to  his  home
    address in Birmingham on 22nd May.

6.   A representative of the respondent did attend the  hearing.   Mr  Smart
    acknowledged that the analysis and reasoning deployed by  Judge  Harris
    were brief, but asked me to find that they were adequate.  He handed up
    a copy of Shizad (sufficiency of reasons : set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85
    (IAC), in which the President of our Chamber explains that the  reasons
    for allowing or dismissing an appeal do not have to be extensive if the
    decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted
    by the judge.  In the present case, I think it can just about  be  said
    that the decision as a whole makes sense, despite the  brevity  of  the
    reasons, insofar as  it  relates  to  the  appellant  rather  than  the
    sponsor.  It  certainly  makes  sense  in  the  context  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager's review, which is of an unusually high quality.

7.   At every stage of the  application  and  appeal  process,  the  British
    Immigration  Advisory  Service  have  submitted  a  thick   bundle   of
    documents, accompanied by prolix grounds.  But quantity is not the same
    as quality.  All in all, I can see no material  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's  determination.   On  the  material  before  him,
    including the ECM's  review,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion which he did.




     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              20th June 2013



