

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05145/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 1st July 2015                              |On  6th July 2015            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAMEEN QUDSIA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge O'Hagan who in a determination promulgated on the 9th  February
       2015 allowed the appeal against the refusal of entry clearance  as  a
       visitor.

    2. Sameen Qudsia is a national of Pakistan born  on  the  14th  February
       1991 who sought entry clearance to visit her husband and sponsor. The
       application was refused on 3rd August 2014  as  the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer (ECO) was not satisfied it was a genuine  visit  after  which
       the applicant would return.

    3. The sponsor appeared before the First-tier Tribunal but there was  no
       attendance before the Upper Tribunal. Notices  of  the  hearing  were
       validly served. In the absence of an  explanation  for  the  lack  of
       representation/attendance or an application  to  adjourn,  it  is  in
       accordance with the overriding objectives and duty of  fairness  owed
       to both parties to proceed in absence.

Discussion


    4. The judge was aware of the basis of refusal. The judge noted the  two
       reasons given for the appellant before him  wishing  to  enter  as  a
       visitor which were (i) the desire of the applicant and sponsor to see
       each other and (ii) the wish of the applicant to visit the UK to  see
       whether she should seek entry for the purposes of settlement.

    5. The judge set-out  the  Razgar  questions  in  paragraph  14  and  in
       paragraph 15 states that the first two  of  those  questions  may  be
       taken together. To answer the first question required  the  judge  to
       make a finding on  whether  family  or  private  life  recognised  by
       article 8 exists. The judge finds it does as the  applicant  and  her
       sponsor are married and maintain contact by indirect means and by the
       sponsor visiting the applicant in Pakistan. This is not challenged by
       the ECO.  The second question requires the judge to consider  whether
       the right to respect for such family life has been interfered with to
       a degree that article 8 is engaged. The reason it is  arguable  legal
       error can occur if the two questions are not considered separately is
       that family or private life can exist  and  continue  notwithstanding
       the decision under appeal. In such a case the answer to the first  of
       the questions can be 'yes' and to the second 'no'.

    6. The case law  regarding  article  8  in  entry  clearance  cases  now
       includes the decision in SS (Congo) and Others: [2015] EWCA  Civ  387
       in which Lord Justice Richards drew a distinction in entry  clearance
       cases, on the one hand, involving someone outside the United  Kingdom
       who applies to come here to take up or resume family life when family
       life  was  originally  established   in   ordinary   and   legitimate
       circumstances at some time in the past, rather than in the  knowledge
       of its precariousness in terms of United Kingdom immigration controls
       and cases, on the  other,  where  someone  from  the  United  Kingdom
       marries a foreign national or establishes a family life with them  at
       a stage when they are contemplating trying to live  together  in  the
       United Kingdom, but when they know that their partner does not have a
       right to come here. In the latter cases, the relationship  will  have
       been formed under conditions of known precariousness and it  will  be
       appropriate to apply a  similar  test  of  exceptional  circumstances
       before a violation of Article 8 will be found to arise in relation to
       a refusal to grant LTE outside the Rules.

    7.  In SM and Others (Somalia) 2015 EWCA Civ 223 Bean LJ said it was far
       from clear that the refusal of entry clearance to the family  reunion
       child appellants constituted serious interference with  their  family
       life at all. The mother had left them in the care of her half-brother
       for some four years and maintained regular contact with them. Bean LJ
       said " The case is quite different from the more  typical  one  where
       the status quo before the refusal of entry clearance or the  proposed
       removal was or is a united family... the  trauma  of  breaking  up  a
       family and thereby rupturing family ties may be significantly greater
       than the effect of not facilitating the reunion  of  a  family  whose
       members have become accustomed to living apart following  a  decision
       by part of the family to live elsewhere".

       The material made available did not show that the impact upon refusal
       would be such that the family life  that  currently  exists  will  be
       interfered with to such a degree that article 8 is engaged. As such a
       material legal error is made out.

    8. This is not a settlement application as it is said that may  be  made
       in the future but an application for a visit. Visits have occurred in
       the past by the sponsor visiting the applicant in her home  area  and
       it has not been shown the effect of the decision is that such  visits
       may be prevented.

    9. Whilst it is understood the applicant may wish to see what conditions
       in the UK are  like,  the  option  of  a  settlement  application  is
       available which, if the applicant does not like life in the  UK,  she
       can avoid by returning to Pakistan.

   10. Mr Mills referred to the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Entry
       Clearance Officer v Mostafa [2015] UKUT 00122 in which it  was  found
       at paragraph 24:

           "24.   It is the very essence of Article 8  that  it  lays  down
           fundamental values that have to be considered  in  all  relevant
           cases. It would therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to  be
           prescriptive,  given  the  intensely  factual   and   contextual
           sensitivity of every case. Thus we refrain from suggesting that,
           in this type of case, any particular kind of relationship  would
           always attract the protection of  Article  8(1)  or  that  other
           kinds of relationship would never come within its scope. We are,
           however, prepared to say that it will only be  in  very  unusual
           circumstances that a person other than a close relative will  be
           able to show that the refusal of entry  clearance  comes  within
           the scope of Article 8(1). In practical terms this is likely  to
           be limited to cases where the relationship is  that  of  husband
           and wife or other close life partners  or  a  parent  and  minor
           child and even then it will not necessarily be extended to cases
           where, for example, the proposed visit is based  on  a  whim  or
           will not add significantly to the time that the people  involved
           spend together. In the limited class of cases  where  Article  8
           (1) ECHR is engaged the refusal of entry clearance  must  be  in
           accordance  with  the  law  and  proportionate.  If  a  person's
           circumstances do satisfy the Immigration Rules and they have not
           acted in  a  way  that  undermines  the  system  of  immigration
           control, a refusal of entry  clearance  is  liable  to  infringe
           Article 8."

   11. The application under the Immigration Rules was  refused  as  it  was
       said the applicant had not proved  she  was  a  genuine  visitor  who
       intended to leave the UK within the time stated for the visit  or  at
       all, based upon the reasons provided  in  the  refusal  notice.   The
       right of appeal against the  decision  was  limited  to  the  grounds
       referred to in section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 which prevents an appeal challenging  the  merits  of
       the decision under the Rules. The applicant  had  an  opportunity  to
       challenge such a finding by way of judicial review but did not do so.
       When assessing the article 8 element of the appeal, which is a  valid
       ground, the inability to satisfy the Rules for the reasons stated  is
       a relevant factor but which does not appear to have  been  considered
       by the judge.

   12. The parties married when they knew  they  would  be  unable  to  live
       together as  they  had  no  legitimate  expectation  entry  would  be
       permitted unless they met the  requirements  of  the  Rules  for  the
       purposes of settlement or any other specified purpose. This  includes
       any expectation they would be permitted to visit.

   13. The judge arguably failed to consider the article 8  element  of  the
       appeal correctly in relation to the second of  the  Razgar  questions
       and by omitting material facts and legal principles when  considering
       the proportionality of the decision. It cannot be said  the  decision
       was within the range of those permissible on the  evidence  for  when
       all factors are considered the correct outcome appears to be that the
       decision is proportionate. No  exceptional  circumstances  have  been
       shown to exist.

   14. The determination is set aide, the decision remade,  and  the  appeal
       dismissed.

Decision

   15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is dismissed.

   Anonymity.

   16. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3rd July 2015

