
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05064/2014
                                                               VA/05066/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|on 17 June 2016                               |on 18 August 2016            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            NAZAR AHMAD CHAUDHRY
                           SAEEDA NAZAR CHOUDHARY
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
            (On behalf of an Entry Clearance Officer - Abu Dhabi)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance. Attendance of legal representative
                    excused in advance following request for the matter to
                    be dealt with on the papers.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On the 2 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman allowed the  appeals
    of the appellants' under the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  ECHR
    against the  refusal  of  their  application  for  entry  clearance  as
    visitors. The date of the refusal is the 23 June 2014.

 2. The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal. On the 20 November 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Sheridan conducted the error of law hearing in which he found the First-
    tier Judge had made legal error and set the determination aside.  In  a
    decision dated 26 November  2015  Judge  Sheridan  allowed  the  appeal
    finding the decision to be a disproportionate breach of the  appellants
    Article 8 Human rights.

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal which came before the Upper Tribunal on  the  papers  on  the  6
    January 2016. Pursuant to rule 45  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal Rules) 2008 the Upper  Tribunal  conducted  a  review  of  the
    decision resulting in the following notice being sent to the parties:


           IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
   NOTICE OF OUTCOME OF REVIEW FOLLOWING RECIEPT OF APPLICATION FOR LEAVE
                      TO APPEAL TO THE COURT OF APPEAL


                                                    Appeal No: VA/05064/2014
                                                               VA/05066/2014
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                (Appellants)
                                -     v    -
                            NAZAR AHMAD CHAUDHRY
                           SAEEDA NAZAR CHOUDHARY


                                                               (Respondents)


                      APPEAL DECIDED IN ENGLAND & WALES


      1. The above respondents, a husband and wife, applied for entry to the
         UK as family visitors for the purpose of participating in prayers
         following the death of the second respondent's mother.
      2. The application was made after 25 June 2013 and refused on the 23
         June 2014 by reference to paragraphs 41 (i), (ii), (vi) and (vii)
         of the Immigration Rules.  A right of appeal was granted on limited
         grounds referred to in section 84(1)(c) Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002. For all applications submitted from 25 June
         2013, a person refused entry clearance to visit relatives in the UK
         will be unable to appeal against that immigration decision except
         on (i) human rights and (ii) race relations grounds by virtue of
         s.52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 - the commencement date and
         transitional provisions being set out in the Crime and Courts Act
         2013 (Commencement No. 1 and Transitional and Saving Provision)
         Order (SI 2013/1042).
      3. In Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC) it was
         held that (i) The first question to be addressed in an appeal
         against refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where only
         human rights grounds are available is whether article 8 of the ECHR
         is engaged at all. If it is not, which will not infrequently be the
         case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment
         of the decision of the ECO under the rules and should not do so. If
         article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at the extent
         to which the claimant is said to have failed to meet the
         requirements of the rule because that may inform the
         proportionality balancing exercise that must follow. Mostafa
         (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) is not
         authority for any contrary proposition; (ii) As compliance with
         para 41 of HC 395 is not a ground of appeal to be decided by the
         Tribunal, any findings concerning that will carry little weight,
         especially if based upon arguments advanced only by the appellant.
         If the appellant were to make a fresh application for entry
         clearance the ECO will, if requested to do so, have regard to the
         assessment carried out by the judge but will not be bound by those
         findings to treat the appellant as a person who, at least at the
         date of the appeal hearing, met the requirements of paragraph 41.
      4. The appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules and Article 8
         ECHR.
      5. Permission to appeal was sought and granted to the above appellant
         on the grounds the judge had failed to adequately assess the
         proportionality of the decision under Article 8 ECHR.
      6. The appeal next came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan on
         20 November 2015 who found legal error in the First-tier Judge
         allowing the appeal under Article 8 ECHR without giving reasons for
         why this was engaged or why the decision was not proportionate.
      7. The Deputy Judge refers to the decision in Abbasi and another
         (visits - bereavement - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC) it was
         held that (i) the refusal of a visa to foreign nationals seeking to
         enter the United Kingdom for a finite period for the purpose of
         mourning with family members (siblings and uncles) the recent death
         of a close relative and visiting the grave of the deceased
         (father/grandfather) is capable of constituting a disproportionate
         interference with the rights of the persons concerned under Article
         8 ECHR; (ii) the question of whether Article 8 applies and, if so,
         is breached will depend upon the fact sensitive context of the
         particular case; (iii)   The Tribunal should adopt a structured and
         sequential approach to the Article 8 issues.
      8. Article 1 of the ECHR only requires a contracting state to protect
         human rights within its own jurisdiction. In Abbasi and another
         (visits - bereavement - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC) the
         Tribunal referred to a number of cases in which Article 8 was
         engaged in burial cases but those cases concerned the
         family/private life of those already in the contracting state.
         None of the cases referred to in Abbasi concerned the rights of
         entry into a contracting state by a person from outside of the
         contracting state. Although Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v
         United Kingdom and SS(Malaysia) make it clear that there needs to
         be a family life with a person in the UK (the contracting state)
         and it is the impact of the decision on that person in the UK which
         effectively brings the case within Article1 ECHR jurisdictionally,
         the Tribunal in Abbasi did not refer to the jurisprudence in
         Kugathas when determining whether the appellant had an Article 8
         family life connection with anyone in the UK.  Nor did the Tribunal
         in Abbasi  refer to any Strasburg jurisprudence (which could
         displace the comments in Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v
         United) in support of any contention to extend Article 8 in entry
         cases to protect the private lives of those not in this country.
         Whilst attendance at funerals/memorial services/family marriages
         may, as a matter of fact, have some relevance when considering
         whether the test in Kugathas is met as between an applicant and any
         family members he or she is visiting here, given the comments in
         Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v United Kingdom and SS(Malaysia)
         some question arises as to whether mere attendance at a
         funeral/memorial service/marriage can engage Article 8 in an entry
         appeal per se.
      9. The determination fails to consider relevant case law in relation
         to Article 8 or to properly address the basis on which permission
         to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted. It is proposed that
         the determination of Deputy Judge Sheridan be set aside and the
         appeal relisted for hearing before a salaried judge of the Upper
         Tribunal sitting at Field House at which the issues may be further
         considered. The finding by Judge Sheridan that the refusal
         interferes with a private life right is arguably wrong in law. In
         SS(Malaysia) 2004 UKIAT 00091 Starred the Tribunal said that
         private, as distinct from family life, is not a basis upon which a
         ECHR right of entry can be based since neither the ECHR nor the
         1999 Act can be construed as providing for all those whose private
         lives are restricted in some way in a signatory or non-signatory
         country.
     10. The parties are invited to comment upon these proposals no later
         than 14 days from the sending of this notice to them. A failure to
         respond shall be taken by the Tribunal as agreement to the
         proposal.


    Signed: [pic]
    Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
    Date: 6 January 2016


 4. On 25 April 2016 the Upper Tribunal  reviewed  the  matter  further  in
    light of the responses received and gave the following directions:


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


      1. On 6 January 2016  the  Tribunal  wrote  to  the  parties  inviting
         comment upon observations contained in the notice of said date  and
         the proposal to set the decision of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Sheridan aside and to list the matter for a further hearing  before
         a salaried judge of the Upper Tribunal.
      2. Representations have been received. That for the applicant raises a
         number of issues in opposing the proposal. The respondent takes  no
         objection and notes that if the appeal is dismissed on the basis of
         the jurisdictional  point/application  of  ECHR  the  decision  may
         warrant reporting to provide guidance.
      3. The Deputy Judge placed reliance upon the Upper  Tribunal  decision
         in Abbasi [2015] UKUT  463  which  considered  a  number  of  cases
         relating to Article 8 rights of those in  the  UK,  none  of  which
         refer to the position of a person outside the UK. As Article  1  of
         the European Convention on Human Rights limits the scope  of  those
         able to benefit from such provision to those in the territory of  a
         Contracting State this is a relevant consideration.
      a. The Tribunal considers  it  in  the  interests  of  justice  an  in
         accordance with its powers of review to set aside the  decision  of
         Deputy Judge Sheridan and to hear this matter afresh. The following
         directions shall apply to the future conduct of this appeal:


               a. The decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan shall
                  be set aside. The finding the First-tier Tribunal erred in
                  law and that their determination shall be set aside  is  a
                  preserved finding.
               b. The matter shall be listed for a  resumed  hearing  before
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson sitting at Field House on  the
                  next available date. Time estimate 2 hour.
               c. The parties shall file an  agreed  indexed  and  paginated
                  bundle containing all written material they intend to rely
                  upon, including skeleton arguments and copies of  relevant
                  case law, no later than 14 days before the hearing.
               d. As the applicants are not in the United  Kingdom  and  the
                  issue is that of jurisdiction/scope of Article 8  ECHR  it
                  is  anticipated  the  hearing  can  proceed  by   way   of
                  submissions only. No interpreter shall be provided.


    Decision


    I set aside the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan.   The
    conduct of the appeal  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  directions
    provided above.


 5. The matter was listed for hearing on 17 June 2016.


Discussion


 6. It is necessary to start the reconsideration process at  the  point  at
    which it has been found arguable that the First-tier Judge has made  an
    error of law material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.

 7. The factual matrix of this appeal is that  the  first  appellant  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan born on the 1 January 1959 and the second appellant
    his wife born on the 14 October 1966. The appellants' applied for leave
    to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  visitors.  They  stated  in  their
    applications that on the 27 May 2014 the second appellant's grandmother
    died in the UK and they wished to participate in prayers following  her
    death.  The Entry Clearance Office considered the application  and  has
    given multiple reasons for concluding why the appellants' are unable to
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 41 of the Rules, being  (i)  that
    the claimants  were  not  genuinely  seeking   entry  as  visitors  and
    intended to leave (41(i) and (ii)), that they  would  not  be  able  to
    accommodate themselves without employment or recourse to  public  funds
    (paragraph 41(vi)), and that they could not meet the costs of an onward
    journey (41(vii).


    Legal error in the First-tier decision


 8. There are two clear errors of law in the determination  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal material to the decision to dismiss the appeal. The first
    of these relates to that Tribunals consideration of  the  merits  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 9. Section 52 Crime and Courts Act 2013 provided that  appeals  against  a
    refusal of a family visit visa applied for on or after 25 June 2013 may
    only be brought  on  human  rights  grounds.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    therefore had no jurisdiction to decide the merits of the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules. Consideration of the merits  is  permissible  as
    they may form part of the Article  8  assessment,  but  this  does  not
    confer jurisdiction that does not otherwise exist.

10. The second legal error relates to the assessment of the Article 8 claim
    in that a failure to give reasons for a finding on a material matter is
    an error of law. The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 without giving any or sufficient reasons  for  doing  so.  No
    reasoned finding is made that Article 8 is engaged and, if so, why. The
    assessment of why refusing leave to enter is not proportionate is  non-
    existent. No balancing exercise has been undertaken and the  First-tier
    Judge failed to engage with relevant legal provisions,  case  law,  and
    terms of the ECHR  referred  to  in  the  review  document  above.  The
    decision is therefore set aside.


    Remaking the decision


11. The factual matrix summarised above is not disputed.

12. The Upper Tribunal recently considered the issue of  visits by overseas
    applicants arising out of a bereavement in the UK in the case of Abbasi
    and another (visits - bereavement - Article 8) [2015] UKUT  00463,  the
    header of which reads:


         1.   The refusal of a visa to foreign nationals  seeking  to  enter
         the United Kingdom for a finite period for the purpose of  mourning
         with family members the  recent  death  of  a  close  relative  and
         visiting the grave of the deceased is  capable  of  constituting  a
         disproportionate  interference  with  the  rights  of  the  persons
         concerned under Article 8 ECHR.


         2.   The question of whether Article  8  applies  and,  if  so,  is
         breached will  depend  upon  the  fact  sensitive  context  of  the
         particular case.


         3.   The Tribunal should adopt a structured and sequential approach
         to the Article 8 issues.


13. In Abbasi the President  repeated  the  importance  of  the  structured
    approach required in an Article 8 assessment. The starting point has to
    be consideration of whose Article 8 rights  are  being  considered,  in
    this case the appellants' as the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not  suggest
    otherwise, and where such individuals are. It is not disputed that  the
    appellants' are not in the United Kingdom.

14. The rational for the decision in Abbasi is set out in paragraph  11  of
    that judgment in the following terms:


         11.  As the decided cases  of  the  ECtHR  make  clear,  the  FtT's
             decision that the Appellants' appeals did not fall within  the
             ambit of Article 8 ECHR is unsustainable.  The  Judge's  error
             was driven by an impermissibly narrow approach to the scope of
             Article 8 protection and a concentration  on  the  Appellants'
             family life in Pakistan, to the exclusion of both their family
             ties in the United Kingdom and the central  purpose  of  their
             proposed visit. The essence of the  error  was  a  failure  to
             recognise that the particular aspect  of  private  and  family
             life  invoked  by  the  Appellants  was   capable   of   being
             encompassed by Article 8 ECHR.  The  protection,  or  benefit,
             which they were asserting had the potential of being protected
             by Article 8 ECHR.


15. The Upper Tribunal in Abbasi relied upon a number  of  cases  on  which
    they placed great weight including Znamenskaya  v  Russia  (Application
    no. 7785/01), Dodsbo v Sweden [2007]  45  EHRR  22,  Yildrim  v  Turkey
    (Application no. 25327/02), Sargsyan v  Azerbaijan  [2011]  ECHR  2337,
    Kochieva v Sweden [2012] ECHR 549, Sabanchiyeva v Russia [2014] 58 EHRR
    14. These were considered relevant cases as  they  all  concern  issues
    surrounding the various rights and rituals associated  with  death  and
    mourning. What is of potential significance in those cases, however, is
    that all the claimants were within the  territory  of  the  Contracting
    State they were asserting had violated their Article 8 rights.

16. In Abbasi and this appeal the appellants are not within  the  territory
    of the Contracting State. Mr Kotas submitted  that  the  only  remotely
    comparable case is Kochieva v Sweden  [2012]  ECHR  549  where  it  was
    argued that removal of an asylum seeking mother  and  her  3  dependent
    children from Sweden, where one of her children was buried following  a
    road traffic accident, would constitute a breach of Article 8  as  they
    would be unable to visit the child's grave. The ECtHR decided that  the
    complaint was manifestly unfounded on the basis that they would  be  at
    liberty to apply for visits to Sweden for that purpose. It is submitted
    that the decision of the ECtHR is that they were not required to decide
    the Article 8 point as in reality applying for a visit visa was  not  a
    fanciful prospect.

17.  The  core  issue  raised  in  the  review  document  is  that  of  the
    territoriality point. Article 1 ECHR provides that:


         The High Contracting parties shall secure to everyone within  their
         jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in section 1  of  this
         Convention.


18. The ability of an individual to rely upon the  protection  afforded  by
    the  ECHR  when  outside  the  jurisdiction  was  considered   by   the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal, a forerunner of the Upper Tribunal, in the
    case of Sun Myung Moon (Human rights, entry clearance, proportionality)
    USA [2005] UKIAT 00122. This case involved an application for entry  by
    a spiritual leader based in the United States of America who wished  to
    enter the UK.

19. The Tribunal, composed of the Hon Mr Justice Ouseley, Mr C M G Ockelton
    and Mr D K Allen, considered whether  in  principle  Convention  rights
    could be extended to cover those not present  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Having reviewed the available domestic and  European  jurisprudence  it
    was found:


         39.  It is possible to see  how  the  removal  of  someone  who  is
         present in the territory may engage his ECHR rights; he  has  those
         rights by virtue of being in the  territory.  Although  the  motive
         which lies behind  an  alleged  breach  is  not  relevant  in  some
         instances, it may be when  a  qualified  right  is  at  issue.  The
         presence in the country leads to the individual having  the  rights
         under Article 10; removal for exercising such rights would  not  be
         permitted  by  Article  10(2)  unless  there  were  a   sound   and
         proportionate basis within the qualifications in Article 10(2)  for
         removing someone. Thus, as  the  Court  of  Appeal  concluded,  the
         exercise by the state of its powers to remove an alien who  has  no
         right to remain, may "engage" ECHR  rights  where  the  purpose  of
         removal is to prevent their exercise. By "engagement" we mean  that
         the human rights which he has, as someone  present  in  the  United
         Kingdom,  are  potentially  infringed  and  that  infringement  may
         require justification if the sole reason for his  proposed  removal
         is to prevent his exercise of a right or as a sanction  for  having
         exercised it.


         40.  But it is very different when one comes to entry.  That  logic
         becomes much more difficult to apply. The mere fact that someone is
         a legal person, albeit outside the territory  of  a  member  state,
         obviously cannot mean  that  he  enjoys  the  rights  conferred  or
         obligations enforceable against a state by the ECHR. The  Court  of
         Appeal does not suggest that the simple fact that he  has  made  an
         application  for  entry  clearance   through   attendance   at   or
         correspondence with United Kingdom diplomatic premises or officials
         confers by itself any rights under Article 10(1); nor  that  if  it
         did, there was a right of entry to exercise them  subject  only  to
         the application of the qualifications in  the  qualified  Articles,
         and subject  to  no  qualifications  if  the  Article  were  itself
         unqualified, such as Article 3. It would have been remarkable if it
         had done so. The basis of the Court of Appeal's decision appears to
         be that it is the refusal of entry clearance, for the  sole  reason
         that the state wishes to prevent the exercise of the  ECHR  rights,
         which engages ECHR. It is not easy to see why the interference with
         what was not a right then creates the right; but that appears to be
         the reasoning. And it is different from the reasoning applicable to
         a removal case, yet  the  Court  of  Appeal  draws  no  distinction
         between the two.


         ...


         Can the Appellant assert any ECHR rights?


         44.  The second issue is whether the Appellant, who is  not  within
         the territory of a member state, has any Convention rights which he
         can assert either through his application for entry clearance or in
         consequence of the exclusion decision of the  Secretary  of  State,
         rights which  would  have  then  been  breached  if  the  exclusion
         decision were disproportionate. The Appellant acknowledged that the
         notion of the scope of the ECHR  was  essentially  territorial  and
         that it was  only  exceptionally  that  rights  could  be  asserted
         outside the jurisdiction or  territory  of  the  member  state.  He
         sought to distinguish two issues: (1) was a decision  of  an  Entry
         Clearance Officer  capable  of  being  an  act  within  the  United
         Kingdom's jurisdiction as to engage Convention rights? (2)  If  so,
         which Convention rights could lay the foundations for an ECHR based
         challenge to an exclusion decision?


         45.  The Appellant contended that the Adjudicator erred in  holding
         that only Article 8 gave rise to a basis for  an  extra-territorial
         claim to enter. The Appellant's argument, as it  developed  orally,
         focussed more on the logic that if the Convention  could  apply  in
         Article  8  cases,  then  there  were  clearly  exceptions  in  the
         immigration field to the notion of territoriality, and the task was
         to ascertain the principle which underlay the Article 8  exceptions
         and to test its applicability to  other  Articles.  The  Article  8
         cases, as the IAT had itself recognised, permitted someone  not  in
         the territory to assert that his Convention rights were breached by
         a refusal of entry clearance, where he wished to enter to enjoy  an
         established family life with someone already settled in the  United
         Kingdom. This exception, it  was  submitted,  recognised  that  the
         rights of the family member settled here would be breached if entry
         clearance were refused to the spouse or child.


         46.  There were, it was submitted, analogies to  be  drawn  between
         family relationships which were thus protected and the relationship
         between a religious leader and his adherents in  the  manifestation
         of religious beliefs,  in  the  freedom  to  receive  the  leader's
         expression of beliefs and  support  and  to  impart  to  him  their
         concerns and needs, and for those purposes to  associate  with  him
         and the leader with them. Just as in the  Article  8  cases,  there
         would have been a breach of the Convention rights of those  settled
         here if entry clearance had been refused, so here one could  extend
         to other Articles that principled basis for the Article 8 exception
         by recognising  that  those  with  whom  the  Appellant  wished  to
         associate, or communicate or provide religious inspiration to, were
         settled here and would be entitled to assert that their  Convention
         rights were breached by his exclusion.


         47.  The counter arguments for the Secretary of State stressed  the
         recent  and  authoritative  jurisprudence  of  the  ECtHR   itself,
         identifying the essentially territorial basis for the operation  of
         the Convention in Bankovic v Belgium (2001) 11 BHRC 435.  This  had
         been considered in  three  important  United  Kingdom  cases:  B  v
         Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2004] EWCA
         Civ 1344, R (Quark Fishing Ltd) v Secretary of  State  for  Foreign
         and Commonwealth Affairs [2004] 3 WLR 1, and Al Skeini v  Secretary
         of State for Defence [2004] EWHC Admin 2911. These demonstrated the
         limited nature  of  the  so-called  exceptions  to  the  notion  of
         "territoriality": effective member state control over an area,  and
         specific acts of consular or diplomatic officials and the like; but
         not all that they did fell within that concept. In R (European Roma
         Rights Centre) v Immigration Officer at Prague Airport [2004]  UKHL
         55, [2005] 2 WLR 1, Lord Bingham  had  expressed  grave  doubts  at
         paragraph 21 as to whether functions performed by  Entry  Clearance
         Officers abroad could possibly  be  said  to  be  the  exercise  of
         jurisdiction over non-United Kingdom nationals. A further  type  of
         exception, but in our view it may be related to the second, is  the
         exercise by a state of power over its nationals  abroad.  There  is
         also  the  type  of  exception,  often  described  as  not  a  true
         exception, seen in removal cases where the removal is in breach  of
         the Convention because of the treatment which will be meted out  in
         the country  to  which  the  individual  will  be  returned.  These
         decisions demonstrated  that  the  idea  that  the  Convention  was
         engaged simply by the effect or impact of the  acts  of  the  state
         abroad, eg by bombing people, was wrong.


         48.  The Article 8 cases properly analysed all involved  those  who
         were  settled  in  the  state,  and  the  exception  was   narrowly
         circumscribed. They refuted the notion that there was scope for any
         extension by analogy to other Articles. There was no  true  analogy
         anyway between family life, which needs cohabitation for it  to  be
         fully enjoyed, and the free communication and association which  is
         part of religious practice but which can be carried on without such
         proximity and through other means of communication.


         49.  We can take the general principles very shortly. We accept the
         Secretary of State's submissions which we have summarised above  in
         relation to the territorial approach and the exceptions to it. They
         are borne out by the cases cited and we do not wish to add to  what
         Rix  LJ  said  in  paragraphs  244-280  in  Al  Skeini,  which   is
         authoritative and compelling.


         50.  The particular difficulty is in analysing the extent to  which
         entry clearance comes within the scope of the "consular  exception"
         at  all.  Some  reliance  was  placed  by  the  Appellant  on   the
         observation of Lord Steyn in R (Ullah) v Special Adjudicator [2004]
         UKHL 26, [2004] 2 AC 323, paragraph 36,  to  the  effect  that  the
         basis of the reasoning of the ECtHR in Abdulaziz and  Others  v  UK
         [1985] 7 EHRR 471, was an over-arching conclusion that in the field
         of immigration, decisions must respect the rights in Article 8.  It
         was said that that showed that the  decision  was  not  exclusively
         dependant on the fact that the applicants to the ECtHR included the
         wives who were settled here. We do not think that that  observation
         bears the weight put on it. It reflects what the Court itself said;
         the Court was not saying  that  non-nationals  abroad  could  claim
         entry based on the ECHR, but rather it was scotching the idea  that
         the field of immigration, which might have  been  thought  an  area
         entirely  outside  the  scope  of  the  ECHR,  could  never  engage
         Convention rights. But it did not address the issue of whose rights
         could do so and whether they included non-nationals who were not in
         the territory.


         51.  The question of the scope  of  the  "consular  or  diplomatic"
         exception was considered in both B and Al  Skeini.  In  B,  it  was
         assumed that the boys in the Melbourne Consulate were  sufficiently
         within the jurisdiction, although it was an  assumption  which  the
         Court appeared content to make, pointing out not the mere  presence
         of the boys within the building, but also the degree of  protection
         given to the boys and reassurance as to their  safety  by  consular
         staff.


         52.  In Al Skeini, at paragraph  269  on,  Rix  LJ  refers  to  the
         exception to territoriality created by the lawful presence  of  the
         consular agents and rejects an argument that it was only their acts
         in relation to nationals which could engage the ECHR.  However,  it
         is clear that when in  paragraph  272  he  considers  the  consular
         exception he deals with it in the context relevant for  that  case,
         which concerned confinement  and  physical  control  over  an  area
         within the jurisdiction of another  state.  We  derive  no  further
         assistance from those cases.


         53.  We note the comment of Lord Bingham in the  Roma  rights  case
         upon which Miss  Carss-Frisk  relied,  which  clearly  supports  an
         argument that no Entry Clearance Officer decision as it  affects  a
         non-national can bring that individual within the  jurisdiction  so
         as to enable him to assert ECHR rights.


         54.  We  do  not  find  assistance  in  relation  to  the  consular
         exception in any of the ECtHR Article 8 cases: Abdulaziz above, Sen
         v Netherlands (2003) 36 EHRR 81 or Advic v UK (25525/94).  In  none
         was the issue of territoriality considered.  Bankovic  came  before
         Sen, but the Court was silent about the issue of territoriality. It
         is likely that  this  was  because  in  each  instance  there  were
         applicants who were settled in the country seeking the admission of
         family members who were not. True it is that  the  ECtHR  does  not
         draw any obvious distinction between the two categories of persons,
         but it is of limited value therefore in seeking any guidance as  to
         any general approach to territoriality and the consular  exception,
         whatever it may say about Article 8.


         55.  The Appellant attributed significance in this context  to  the
         statutory appeal provisions, which we reject. The appeal provisions
         in the 2002 Act provide in section 90(1) that a right of appeal  is
         only available to someone who seeks to enter as a  visitor  if  the
         application was made for the purposes of visiting a member  of  the
         applicant's family. Section 90(4) provides that subsection (1) does
         not prevent the bringing of an appeal on human rights  grounds.  It
         might be thought that that enabled an appeal to be brought on human
         rights grounds only by a  visitor  who  had  a  family  connection.
         Subsection  (1)  restricts  who  can  appeal  as  a  visitor,   and
         subsection (4) limits the grounds upon which such an appellant  can
         appeal. That would mean that this Appellant had no right of  appeal
         at all. However, that was not the point taken by the  Secretary  of
         State, and we do not need to decide whether that was  a  concession
         and if so whether correctly made. The effect of  the  provision  is
         therefore, for the purposes of this appeal, simply to restrict  the
         grounds of appeal which a non-family visitor may  deploy  to  those
         which relate to human rights.


         56.  On that basis, the ground of appeal  in  section  84(1)(c)  is
         that the decision is incompatible with the Appellant's rights under
         the Convention. But if there are no  Convention  rights  available,
         there are none which can be asserted. The enactment of  section  90
         may have involved an understandable uncertainty as to  the  ability
         of a non-national abroad  to  rely  on  the  ECHR,  and  Parliament
         preserved that right insofar as it existed. It  did  not  create  a
         right which did not otherwise exist under  the  Convention  as  its
         language makes clear. The existence of the right cannot be advanced
         by the provision; it can merely be protected if it exists. At best,
         it could evidence an erroneous Parliamentary assumption, if we  are
         right, as  we  later  conclude,  as  to  the  extent  to  which  an
         application for entry clearance (necessarily by a non-national) can
         engage  the  ECHR.  If  those  rights   had   existed,   then   any
         interpretation of the Act which excluded those  rights  would  have
         been incompatible with the ECHR and it would have had  to  be  read
         down so as to make it compatible. But none  of  that  advances  the
         notion that the provisions themselves provide an answer  here.  Nor
         have we seen anything which suggests that the HRA 1998 was intended
         to create, and certainly the 2002 Act was not intended  to  do  so,
         rights which were more extensive territorially than  those  created
         within the confines of the ECHR and Article 1.  Such  a  suggestion
         would  be  contrary  to  section  84(1)(c)  anyway,  and   to   the
         authorities on the continuing effect of the unscheduled  Article  1
         ECHR.


20. The Panel in Moon also endorsed the  decision  in  H  (Somalia)  [2004]
    UKIAT 27 which at [40] provided:


         "The duty and jurisdiction exists in relation  to  whatever  rights
         they may have in the light of their absence from the  territory  of
         the United Kingdom and the nature  of  what  they  seek.   For  the
         reasons which we  have  given,  those  rights  cannot  sensibly  be
         regarded as  encompassing  all  the  Convention  rights  which  are
         available to those with in the territory."


    At [58] of Moon it was stated:


         58.  No submissions have been addressed to  us  which  persuade  us
         that that general approach is wrong. Indeed, we would regard it  as
         reinforced by the observations of Lord Bingham in the  Roma  Rights
         case.  The  increasing  emphasis  in  the  domestic  cases  on  the
         essentially territorial nature of the Convention would also support
         it. None of them  directly  address  the  scope  of  the  "consular
         exception", although it could cover  the  acts  of  the  diplomatic
         agents towards those over whom they had some physical  control  and
         towards whom they had accepted some  responsibility  as  in  B.  It
         seems to us to be impossible to contend that the exercise of  every
         consular function engages the ECHR for the person who has come into
         contact with a consular official.


21. Further relevant findings are to be found at paragraphs 68, 71-73:


         68.  It is not necessary to examine for the purposes of this appeal
         whether that remains good law or whether in the light of Al Skeini,
         B, and the observations of Lord Bingham in the Roma rights case, it
         should be revisited. Neither party sought to suggest  that  it  was
         wrong. We would only say that the  difficulties  which  we  had  in
         finding a rational basis for the earlier decisions, and  one  which
         grappled with the basis upon which a non-national could  rely  upon
         an application for entry clearance as  giving  a  right  under  the
         Convention, have not eased. We entertain very  considerable  doubts
         as to whether it is now correct to say that any ECHR rights can  be
         invoked by those who are non-nationals abroad seeking to enter  the
         country. The better view may well be that the rights to be asserted
         are those of the persons settled here who  should  assert  them  by
         Judicial Review, as victims of  the  immigration  decision.  It  is
         their right to family  life  which  is  engaged  and  falls  to  be
         considered but it cannot  be  done  through  the  mechanisms  of  a
         statutory appeal. We shall assume, however,  for  the  purposes  of
         this appeal, that what we said in H (Somalia) remains good law, and
         accordingly, we examine the Appellant's position on that basis.  We
         reject the analogy which Mr Pannick  sought  to  draw  between  the
         rights to family life within Article 8 and  the  rights  which  the
         Appellant seeks to invoke here,  important  though  they  are.  The
         essence of family life, which  makes  it  possible  that  the  ECHR
         extends  to  some  non-nationals   outside   of   the   territorial
         jurisdiction who seek respect for their family  life  with  someone
         settled here, is the need  for  physical  proximity  between  those
         persons. This would cover the normal relationships between  husband
         and wife, parent and child and closely allied relationships. We did
         not conclude that Article 8  in  this  extended  form  covered  all
         aspects of personal and private  life,  or  necessarily  all  those
         relationships which could come within the  notion  of  family  life
         within the Convention. It covers the  basic  components  of  family
         life, of personal relationships which require a physical  proximity
         in order for them to be enjoyed in any  real  sense.  We  emphasise
         that, in this extended form, we were examining the issue  from  the
         standpoint of the non-national out of country, rather than from the
         standpoint of the family member settled here. Our comments  do  not
         bear upon the position of the latter were they to assert rights  as
         in Abdulaziz.


         69.  Those Article 8 rights bear but limited  comparison  with  the
         Convention rights involved here in terms of the need  for  physical
         presence in the same place as  others  in  order  for  them  to  be
         enjoyed. Viewed from the standpoint  of  the  non-national  seeking
         entry, whether as leader or follower, physical proximity may  bring
         advantages in  the  manifestation  of  religious  beliefs,  and  in
         communication and association but is not of its very  essence.  The
         right to family life is not a right  of  association.  Indeed,  the
         Roma rights case suggests that even if someone were persecuted  for
         the manifestation of their beliefs, they would not have a right  of
         entry.


         70.  From the standpoint of those settled here, these other  rights
         may be greatly enhanced by the presence and words  of  a  spiritual
         leader speaking directly to a gathering of his followers.  Personal
         communication may be very important to the expression of  religious
         beliefs; there are rights  to  associate  which  his  presence  may
         enhance. But there are other means of communication which have been
         developed over time from the  letter  to  the  recording  and  live
         telephonic communication which may provide a second best but  still
         enable some of the functions of religious  life  with  a  spiritual
         leader to be carried out. Travel by the followers for  the  purpose
         of meeting  the  leader  may  well  be  possible,  for  it  is  not
         necessarily the case, and it is not here, that the  followers  wish
         to live with the leader or he with them in the United  Kingdom.  It
         is a visit which is desired. We do not regard these  considerations
         as comparable in terms of the need for personal  proximity  to  the
         closer family relationships without which the family unit  and  the
         very basis of an  individual's  personal  and  private  life  would
         perish. There is a real difference in  degree  which  goes  to  the
         fundamental basis of the exercise of the rights at issue in  either
         instance.


         71.   Just  as  the  Soering  case  illustrates  that  the   values
         associated with Article 3 permitted some form of extension  to  the
         operation of the Convention to protect those very basic rights,  so
         the protection of the basic family life rights of someone  who  can
         only enjoy them with someone who is settled here,  may  warrant  an
         extension to the ordinary operation of the Convention in respect of
         non-nationals abroad. We would not see the rights invoked  in  this
         case as comparable in their demands upon the member state  for  the
         grant of entry clearance, to those invoked  in  the  closer  family
         relationships.


         72.  We also accept that an essential  feature  of  the  Article  8
         cases is the existence in  the  United  Kingdom  of  someone  whose
         rights would be breached if entry clearance were not granted to the
         applicant. We would accept that that enables some comparison to  be
         drawn between the spouses, fianc�s and parents  in  the  Article  8
         cases and the fellow members  of  the  Unification  Church  in  the
         United Kingdom. It may be that their rights under  Articles  9,  10
         and 11 would be breached by the exclusion  of  the  Appellant,  but
         that is not how the case has been evidenced or essentially  argued.
         We take the view that that essential feature of the Article 8 cases
         is not the defining characteristic of a principled allowance of the
         availability of the  Convention  rights  to  those  who  would  not
         normally have them. It is simply that that is an essential  feature
         of that very particular and pragmatic exception which  is  designed
         to meet a very particular problem.


         73.  It would not be right to create enlarged areas of exception on
         the basis of the Article 8 cases; rather than being the source of a
         principled extension to the normal territorial reach of  the  ECHR,
         the principles of which can be ascertained  and  applied  to  other
         cases, those cases are an  exception  and  should  remain  so.  The
         jurisprudence  of  the  ECtHR  is  pragmatic  rather  than   always
         principled. If there is a principle to  be  established,  the  more
         obvious one is that the ECHR cannot be invoked by  someone  who  is
         not in the normal territorial jurisdiction so as to  obtain  entry.
         It is the Article 8 cases which are exceptional, to the extent that
         they suggest otherwise, and  they  should  not  be  more  generally
         applied. The better view may even be that they are wrong in so  far
         as they suggest that the application to the Entry Clearance Officer
         engages the ECHR for the benefit of the applicant.


22. In this appeal the appellants' are, therefore, required to  show  there
    will be a corresponding breach of someone's Article 8 rights within the
    jurisdiction. This is a finding in  accordance  with  Abbasi  that  the
    question of whether Article 8 applies and,  if  so,  is  breached  will
    depend upon the fact sensitive context of the particular case.

23. I do not find it made out that the appellants' as individual's residing
    in Pakistan, are able to invoke Article 8 in  respect  of  any  private
    life claim they may have.

24. The appellants have family in the United  Kingdom.  The  focus  should,
    therefore, be upon the question whether family life between those  they
    intend to grieve with exists or, arguably, whether the private life  of
    such UK  based  individuals  is  engaged  and  breached.   It  is  also
    necessary to consider, if Article 8 is engaged and rights  breached  to
    the  required  degree  on  the  facts,  whether  the  decision   is   a
    proportionate interference with such Article 8 rights.

25. The issue of death and bereavement  within  a  family  is  a  sensitive
    issue. A case involving a mother who wishes to enter the UK  to  attend
    the funeral of her child may require a pragmatic application of Article
    8, especially as it may be possible to argue that family  life  expires
    on death. Mr Kotas recognises this possibility in his skeleton argument
    by reference to "the particular nuances of death and  grieving  between
    such family members meaning Article 8 rights  are  engaged  in  a  more
    generic and lucid sense".

26. Even if this is  so,  case  law  has  found  that  in  entry  clearance
    applications such a class of case shall be limited. In Mostafa (Article
    8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 122 (IAC)  at  paragraph  24  it  was
    found:


         "... we are, however, prepared to say that it will only be in  very
         unusual circumstances that a person other  than  a  close  relative
         will be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  comes
         within the scope of Article  8(1).   In  practical  terms  this  is
         likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship  is  that  of
         husband and wife or other close life partners or a parent and minor
         child..."


27. In Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487 (IAC)  the  Tribunal
    endorses this restrictive approach in finding at [27]:


         "...  Overall,  unless  an  appellant  can  show  that  there   are
         individual interests at stake covered by Article 8 "of  an  overall
         pressing nature" so as  to  give  rise  to  a  "strong  claim  that
         compelling circumstances may exists to justify  the  grant  of  LTE
         outside the rules" (see  SS  (Congo)  at  [40]  and  [56]),  he  is
         unlikely to succeed.  That  proposition  must  also  hold  good  in
         visitor appeals"


28. A proper assessment of Article 8 ECHR in an appeal cannot be undertaken
    without  considering  the  issue  of  territoriality  when  asking  the
    question 'whose Article 8 rights are being considered'.  It  cannot  be
    correct, as some have read the decision in Abbasi to say,  that  it  is
    right to ignore this principle and in doing to extend the principle  of
    those seeking entry clearance to be with family members to cases  where
    close family life does not exist between an applicant and person in the
    UK. The desire to visit a grave or attend a funeral, per se,  does  not
    arguably invoke Article 8 ECHR without more.

29. In this case the appellants' have failed  to  demonstrate  that  family
    life exists between them and their UK based sponsor or existed  between
    the second appellant and her grandmother before she passed away. It has
    not been made out that  any  private  life  element  of  the  UK  based
    relatives is engaged or breached. It is therefore a case  in  which  it
    has not been shown that Article 8 is engaged on the facts.


Decision

30. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside the
    decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows. This
    appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity


31. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Fee Award

Note: this is not part of the determination.


32. In the light of the decision to re-make the decision in the appeal by
    dismissing it, no fee award is made.


    Reasons:      The appeal is dismissed and no other justification for
    making an award has been made out.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17 August 2016

