
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05452/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 5 August 2015                         |           On 14 August 2015        |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - pretoria
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             alin michael curtis
                         (anonymity order not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr Philip Curtis, Sponsor

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    South Africa born on 1 May  1973.   He  is  sponsored  by  his  brother
    Philip.  On 12 August 2014 he applied to the Appellant  (the  ECO)  for
    entry clearance to visit his brother  and  his  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  On 29 August 2014 the ECO refused the application because  he
    was not satisfied the Applicant had significant ties  in  South  Africa
    and did not intend to take  employment  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was refused by way of reference to  paragraphs  41(ii)  and
    (iii) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. On 9 September 2014 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  By reason of Section 52 of the Crime and Courts  Act  2013,
    the only grounds for appeal are human rights grounds.

 3. The grounds state the decision is the second refusal of  the  Applicant
    for entry clearance as a family visitor and is on the same  grounds  as
    the previous refusal.  They assert the Applicant owns no assets  except
    a car and that he works at the Blue Marlin Hotel owned by  the  Sponsor
    and his wife.  The Applicant's mother lives in a retirement  home  some
    500 metres from the Blue Marlin Hotel.  The Applicant would  return  to
    South Africa and his work after his family visit.  Reference is made to
    the Applicant's socio-economic situation of which no details are  given
    and to the Human Rights Act 1998.

 4. On 11 November 2014 the Entry Clearance Manager reviewed  the  decision
    and stated that no new evidence had been submitted  and  repeated  that
    the Applicant's monthly income and his reliance on  family  members  to
    supplement his  income  meant  the  Applicant  had  not  satisfactorily
    demonstrated that a short visit  was  commensurate  with  his  economic
    circumstances.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 5. By a decision promulgated on 27 April  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Trevaskis allowed the appeal on human rights grounds by way of
    reference to Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  and  the  State's
    obligation to respect an individual's private and family life.

 6. The Judge recorded that at the hearing it was conceded on the basis  of
    evidence  provided  by  the  Sponsor  that  the   Applicant   met   the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  He went  on  to
    find that the Sponsor is the only sibling of the Applicant with whom he
    is able to have any contact and there was a  strong  bond  between  the
    Applicant and the Sponsor's children.  He found at paragraph 20 of  his
    decision that there was a degree of emotional  dependence  between  the
    Appellant and his brother which is greater  than  that  which  normally
    exists between adult siblings.  At paragraph 26 he concluded  that  the
    factors in favour of the interference with family life are "clearly and
    substantially outweighed by those against such interference".  He  went
    on to allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

 7. The ECO sought permission to appeal and on 19 June 2015  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Grimmett granted permission because it was arguable
    the Judge had erred in his assessment of the  "usual  emotional  ties".
    The grounds had referred to jurisprudence about the nature of emotional
    ties and cited Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ.31 in which it was  held
    that:-

         "20. ... neither blood ties nor  the  concern  and  affection  that
             ordinarily go with them  are,  by  themselves  altogether  ...
             enough to constitute family  life.   Most  of  us  have  close
             relations of whom we are extremely fond and whom we visit,  or
             who visit us, from time to time; but none of us would  say  on
             those grounds alone that we share a family life with  them  in
             any sense capable of coming within the meaning and purpose  of
             Article 8.

         ...

         25.  ... because there is no presumption  of  family  life,  in  my
             judgment a family life is not established between an adult and
             his surviving parent or other siblings unless  something  more
             exists than emotional ties."

    The ECO asserted that on this basis the Judge's assessment was based on
    a material misdirection of law.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The Sponsor and his wife attended the hearing.   They  left  their  two
    children outside the hearing room.  The youngest, a daughter aged 8  at
    some point entered the hearing room and I was informed that  the  other
    child, a  son  aged  14  had  Special  Needs  and  was  confined  to  a
    wheelchair.  The Sponsor explained this made travel to South Africa for
    the Sponsor and his family utterly impracticable.

 9. I explained to the Sponsor the very limited and specific  focus  of  an
    error of law hearing and the procedure I would adopt for the hearing.

10. Mr Wilding submitted that the Judge's conclusion at paragraph 20 of his
    decision that:-

         ... the Appellant and the Sponsors are a close family; Mr Curtis is
         the only sibling with whom the Appellant is able to have  any  sort
         of contact; there is also a strong bond between the  Appellant  and
         the Sponsors' children, which will be weakened  by  the  denial  of
         more regular contact ... (and)  there  is  a  degree  of  emotional
         dependence which is greater than that which normally exists between
         adult siblings ...

    amounted to a material error of law when considered in the light of the
    learning in Kugathas.  The Judge had failed to show there was a  degree
    of dependence which in the light of the learning in Kugathas was enough
    to show that the decision amounted to a  sufficient  interference  with
    family life such as to engage the  State's  obligations  under  Article
    8(1) of the European Convention.  Properly, the Judge should have found
    that there was no such interference with family life.   On  this  basis
    the ECO did not  seek  to  challenge  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the decision because as stated in  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal the correct position was that the decision did not
    amount to an interference with private and family  life  sufficient  to
    engage the State's obligations under Article 8.

11. It was evident that Mr Wilding for the  ECO  had  recognised  that  the
    Applicant and indeed the Sponsor were unrepresented and had endeavoured
    to put the submissions by the Judge's  decision  contained  a  material
    error of law in  as  straightforward  and  simple  non-legal  terms  as
    practicable.  I endeavoured to repeat or  explain  the  submissions  so
    that the Sponsor should be able to understand as best  as  possible  in
    the circumstances so as to enable him to make such  representations  as
    he wished to make.

12. Notwithstanding my earlier explanation of the focus of an error of  law
    hearing, the Sponsor started to give evidence about his family and  the
    Applicant's background.  As it soon emerged the background was  unusual
    and in the circumstances I considered it best to let him continue.

13. He said the ECO had focused on his brother's financial circumstances in
    South Africa but had not appreciated that he, the  Sponsor,  would  pay
    all the costs of the Applicant's visit and return to South Africa.  The
    Judge had found that the Applicant's  circumstances  were  unlikely  to
    change and the Sponsor submitted that in the light of this the  State's
    obligations under Article 8 were engaged because the Applicant would on
    this basis never be able to visit the Sponsor and  his  family  in  the
    United Kingdom.  There was no reason to  consider  that  the  Applicant
    would not return to South Africa.

14. The Applicant and the Sponsor were the two youngest of  five  siblings.
    They had all grown up in the same children's home where they  had  been
    taken when the Applicant was about 3 or 4 and the Sponsor was  aged  2.
    One brother was married and living in the United  Kingdom  but  contact
    had been lost long ago. Another brother had died some twenty years  ago
    and their sister had married and gone away  from  her  home  area  some
    twenty years ago and he did not know where she now lived.

15. The Applicant had attended a Special Needs School.   The  Sponsor  said
    that he was "more manual than academic".  He was unable to  manage  his
    financial affairs. The Sponsor maintained an account in his own name in
    South Africa in respect of which arrangements had  been  made  for  the
    Applicant to draw down from it.  He was employed as a  maintenance  man
    at the family owned Blue Marlin Hotel. He lived in the hotel  where  he
    was on stand-by for any emergencies.  Their mother lived  nearby  in  a
    retirement flat which the Sponsor had bought for her when she  and  the
    Applicant had moved from Durban.

16. He had sent the Applicant SAR25,000 in May 2014 for his  birthday  with
    the intention that he should buy a car.  The Sponsor drew my  attention
    to the description of the relevant entry  on  his  South  African  bank
    statement shown to the ECO with the  application  which  states  "Happy
    Birt..".  He added  that  the  Applicant  had  bought  a  car  but  had
    subsequently sold it because it needed  costly  repairs.   The  Sponsor
    explained that as to what was left of the  money  he  had  come  to  an
    arrangement with the Applicant that  he  should  use  it  to  help  his
    partner and to pay for his visits to her in Johannesburg.

17. Subsequent to his placement in a children's home the  Sponsor  had  met
    his father only once when the  Sponsor  was  aged  about  16.   He  had
    subsequently discovered that his father was now  dead.   He  said  that
    given their common history and the Applicant's personal issues  he  was
    in effect the Applicant's father.

18. The ECO had not considered the substantial benefits in kind  which  the
    Applicant enjoyed.  His accommodation on site was provided free as well
    as his  meals.   What  he  received  by  way  of  salary  was  entirely
    disposable income.  He also regularly checked on their mother who lived
    close by.  The Applicant and  their  mother  had  previously  lived  in
    Durban but the Applicant had lost his job there and after he  had  been
    unemployed for some two years the Sponsor had arranged for him to  move
    to the Blue Marlin Hotel in Scottburgh and  had  bought  his  mother  a
    nearby retirement flat.

19. Mr Wilding for the ECO had no questions to put to the  Sponsor  and  no
    further submissions to make.

Error of Law Findings and Consideration

20. I asked the Sponsor if the background evidence about the  family  which
    he had given had been before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   I  noted
    that at the hearing before the Judge the Sponsor had not given evidence
    but his wife had.  She responded that what her husband had said had not
    seemed relevant to her at the time of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.



21. The Judge erred at paragraph 20 of his  decision  because  he  did  not
    address the jurisprudence in Kugathas about normal adult  relationships
    or give adequate reasons for his  conclusion.   In  the  light  of  the
    limited information before him, as recounted by the Sponsor's wife  and
    the learning in Kugathas his finding that the State's obligations under
    Article 8 were engaged because  the  decision  amounted  to  sufficient
    interference with the private and family life of the Applicant and  his
    family was a material error of law.  That part of the Judge's  decision
    dealing with the Article 8 claim should be set aside.  The findings  in
    relation to paragraph 41 of the  Immigration  Rules  should  stand,  at
    least so far as they are relevant to the  appeal  in  relation  to  the
    assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the  ECO's  decision  to  the
    legitimate public end of the maintenance of proper immigration control:
    see paragraph 24 of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT
    00112 (IAC).

22. Both parties agreed that I should re-make the decision without  hearing
    further argument.

The Standard and Burden of Proof

23. The standard of proof is the civil standard that is on the  balance  of
    probabilities.  The burden is on the Applicant.  Only evidence relating
    to matters on or before the date of the decision under  appeal  may  be
    taken into account.

Findings and Consideration

24. I found the Sponsor to be a reliable and credible witness.  Rightly and
    properly there was no challenge made to the Sponsor's evidence.

25. Looking at the evidence in the round and noting that the  Applicant  at
    the date of the decision was aged 41 and is emotionally  dependent,  as
    well as financially dependent because of his employment in  the  family
    owned  hotel.  I  find  the  evidence  shows   that   the   Applicant's
    relationship with  his  brother  is  one  which  crosses  the  Kugathas
    threshold.  The Sponsor is not only the Applicant's brother but also in
    effect his father.  The Appellant experiences  difficulty  in  managing
    various  aspects  of  his  life   for   which   the   Sponsor   accepts
    responsibility.  They have shared their early life which included  many
    vicissitudes which fortunately most people do not experience, and  this
    will have additionally increased the bond between them both as siblings
    and also as brother and surrogate father.  I  am  satisfied  there  are
    elements of emotional dependency of the Applicant on the Sponsor  which
    involve more than just usual emotional family ties between adults.

26. Adopting the five step process for the assessment of Article  8  claims
    endorsed in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27,  I  find  that  there  is
    family life between the Applicant in South Africa and the  Sponsor  and
    his family in the United Kingdom.  The decision under appeal amounts to
    an interference with that family life because of the impact it  has  on
    the way that family life will be conducted in the future  as  explained
    by the Sponsor and the consequences of such interference are in all the
    circumstances of sufficient gravity to engage the  State's  obligations
    under Article 8.  There was no suggestion that the  interference  would
    be otherwise than in accordance with the law or that it  would  not  be
    pursuant to the lawful objective necessary in a democratic  society  in
    the interests of the economic well-being of the country which  includes
    the maintenance of proper immigration control.

27. The issue remains whether the decision  is  in  all  the  circumstances
    proportionate.

28. In assessing the proportionality of the decision under appeal,  I  have
    to consider, amongst other matters, the  factors  outlined  in  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act.  The Applicant is able to speak English and  will
    not have recourse to public funds because his travel to  and  from  the
    United Kingdom and his maintenance and accommodation during his stay in
    the United Kingdom will be met entirely by the  Sponsor,  his  brother.
    Looking at the evidence in the round, and that I have found the  nature
    of the relationship between the Applicant and his brother  exceeds  the
    Kugathas threshold, I conclude that the refusal of entry clearance  for
    a family visit by the  Applicant  is  disproportionate  to  the  public
    interest  and  the  need  to  maintain  proper   immigration   control.
    Consequently the appeal succeeds on human rights grounds.

Anonymity


29. There had been no request for an anonymity direction before the  First-
    tier Tribunal and no request  for  anonymity  was  made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Having considered the appeal I find that  anonymity  is  not
    necessary.




NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained a material  error  of  law
    and is set aside insofar as it deals with  the  Applicant's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  The decision is re-made allowing the  appeal  of
    the Applicant.  Consequently, the appeal of the ECO is dismissed.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   11.
viii. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE ECO: FEE AWARD

The Applicant's appeal has been allowed on the basis of evidence  which  was
not  put  before  the  ECO.   In  these  circumstances  I  do  not  find  it
appropriate to make a fee award.

Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   11.
viii. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



