


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/06293/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at IAC Manchester                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On  1 April 2016                          |On 13 April 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               rizwana imtiaz
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Sponsor in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   (SSHD). However, for the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the
   SSHD as the respondent and Mrs Imtiaz as the appellant, reflecting  their
   positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 3 July 1960. She  applied
   for entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  family  visitor.  Her
   application was refused on 13 August 2014. The  application  was  refused
   under paragraph 320(7A) of the immigration rules on the grounds that  the
   appellant had failed to disclose all her family members living in the UK,
   as she had only declared her son in her application form. The refusal was
   also under paragraph 41 of the rules, on the grounds that the  respondent
   was not satisfied that the appellant was genuinely seeking entry only  as
   a visitor and that she intended to leave the UK at the end of  her  stay.
   The respondent was also not satisfied that the appellant's  circumstances
   in Pakistan were as claimed, noting a large unexplained  deposit  in  her
   husband's bank account.

3. The appellant lodged an appeal against that decision. It was asserted  in
   the grounds that there was no intention to deceive, but the appellant had
   only mentioned her son since he  was  the  only  family  member  she  was
   intending to visit. An explanation was also given for the source  of  the
   deposit  in  her  husband's  account.  In  response  to  the  appeal  the
   respondent maintained the decision and did not consider that  it  was  in
   breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

4. The appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  on  15  April
   2015 and was allowed by Judge Nicol in a decision promulgated on  15  May
   2015. The judge noted that the right of appeal was limited to the grounds
   in section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
   and therefore considered the appeal under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  The
   judge accepted that  the  appellant,  by  naming  only  her  son  in  her
   application form,  had  not  intended  to  deceive  the  Entry  Clearance
   Officer. He also accepted that her  circumstances  in  Pakistan  were  as
   claimed, that her intentions in visiting the UK were genuine and that she
   had no intention of remaining in the UK after her visit. He accepted that
   she was able to meet the financial requirements of the immigration rules,
   through her husband. The judge concluded that family life existed between
   the appellant and her sponsor, that there were exceptional  circumstances
   justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules  and  that  the
   refusal of entry clearance was disproportionate. He allowed the appeal on
   Article 8 grounds.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the basis that the judge's finding that family  life  existed  between
   the appellant and her sponsor was contrary to relevant  caselaw  such  as
   Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ  31
   and Ghising & Ors (Ghurkhas/BOCs : historic wrong; weight) (Nepal) [2013]
   UKUT 567; that the judge's proportionality assessment was inadequate; and
   that the judge had given  inadequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
   appellant had not intended to deceive the ECO.

6. Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently  granted
   on 10 September 2015.

7. The sponsor, the appellant's son, appeared before me at the  hearing.  He
   was not legally represented. His concern  was  the  decision  made  under
   paragraph 320(7A) and the automatic ban arising  from  paragraph  320(7B)
   which would prevent his mother from re-applying to  visit  him.  He  said
   that she had not intended to deceive the ECO and had simply misunderstood
   what was being asked when she filled out the application form. Mr McVeety
   accepted that the judge's decision on  paragraph  320(7A)  had  not  been
   challenged by the respondent in the grounds  and  he  accepted  that  the
   refusal under that paragraph should be overturned. However, with  respect
   to the decision under Article 8, he submitted that the judge had erred in
   law and had failed to explain why Article 8 was engaged, in the light  of
   the decision in Ghising and the  recent  case  of  Kaur  (visit  appeals;
   Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487.

8. I then advised the sponsor that the judge's decision on Article  8  could
   not stand and had to be re-made by dismissing the appeal,  but  that  the
   decision under paragraph 320(7A) and (7B) would not be maintained by  the
   respondent.


Conclusions


9. As Mr McVeety properly submitted, the judge, in finding  that  Article  8
   was engaged on the basis of the appellant's family life,  had  failed  to
   engage with the principles in Kugathas and  Ghising.  He  had  failed  to
   identify any dependency existing between the appellant and sponsor so  as
   to give rise to a conclusion  that  family  life  existed  between  adult
   family members. Indeed, there was no evidence of such  dependency  before
   him.


10. The Upper Tribunal, in the case of Kaur, referred to previous  decisions
   in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112  and  Adjei
   (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261, both of  which  addressed  the
   application of Article 8 in family visitor cases.  The Tribunal,  in  all
   those cases, made it clear that Article 8 had to be engaged in the  first
   place, in order for a visit appeal to be able to succeed on such  grounds
   and, in Mostafa, said at [24] that:


      "It will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other
      than a close relative will be able to show that the refusal of entry
      clearance comes within the scope of Article 8(1). In practical terms
      this is likely to be limited to cases where the relationship is that
      of husband and wife or other close life partners or a parent and minor
      child..."


11. In the circumstances, therefore,  Judge  Nicol  had  clearly  failed  to
   explain his conclusion that Article 8 was engaged. There was no  evidence
   to suggest that it was.

12. Furthermore, even if Article 8 was engaged, the  appellant  would  still
   have to demonstrate compelling circumstances justifying a grant of  leave
   outside the rules. That was made clear in Kaur, where the  Tribunal  said
   at [27] that:


      "Overall, unless an appellant can show that there are individual
      interests at stake covered by Article 8 "of a particularly pressing
      nature" so as to give rise to a "strong claim that compelling
      circumstances may exist to justify the grant of LTE outside the rules"
      (see SS (Congo) at [40] and [56]), he is exceedingly unlikely to
      succeed. That proposition must also hold good in visitor appeals."


13. Again, the evidence before the judge did  not  indicate  that  any  such
   circumstances existed.

14. Accordingly Judge Nicol plainly erred in  his  approach  to  Article  8.
   There was no evidence before him to show that,  even  if  Article  8  was
   engaged, there were circumstances existing justifying a  grant  of  leave
   outside the immigration rules. Accordingly his decision cannot stand.


15. In re-making the decision, I do not accept that Article  8  is  engaged.
   Whilst there are clearly family ties between the appellant and  her  son,
   there is no evidence of dependency to show that  the  ties  are  anything
   other than the normal ties between adult family members. Even if  Article
   8 was engaged it is clear that the appellant has not been  able  to  show
   that the respondent's decision was in any way disproportionate or that it
   amounted to a breach of her right to respect for her  family  life  under
   Article 8 of the ECHR. Whether or not the requirements of the immigration
   rules under paragraph 41 have been found to be met,  that  alone  is  not
   sufficient to outweigh the public interest so as to justify  a  grant  of
   leave outside the rules on Article 8 grounds.


16. In re-making the decision, I  therefore  dismiss  the  appeal  on  human
   rights grounds. I would emphasise again,  however,  that  as  Mr  McVeety
   accepted, the refusal under paragraph 320(7A) is not upheld.

DECISION

17. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside and
   the SSHD's appeal is allowed. I re-make the  decision  and  substitute  a
   decision dismissing Mrs Imitiaz's appeal on Article 8 grounds.










                               Signed

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
