
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/06175/2014
                                                               VA/06176/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd December 2015                 |On 14th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               bAKHTIAR aHMED
                                 HIDA bEGUM
                        (anonymity direction not made
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Sajid Ahmad, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Robson made following a hearing at Bradford on 16th April 2015.

 2. The claimants made an application to come to the UK to visit their  son
    but were refused on 21st August 2014 on the grounds that in  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's view they had  employed  deception  in  failing  to
    declare that their son Aabid Nasi Khan was in the UK,  under  paragraph
    320(7B) of HC 395.

 3. They were also refused in relation to paragraph 41(i) and (ii)  because
    the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that only a  short  visit
    was intended.

 4. The judge concluded that, whilst the claimants had omitted  to  mention
    their son, the omission was not deliberate.  He allowed the  appeal  in
    relation to paragraph 320(7B).  He  went  on  to  find  that  they  had
    sufficient ties which  would  give  them  an  incentive  to  return  to
    Pakistan.

 5. Finally he said that it was not disputed that the sponsor was a  member
    of the British Army and  it  was  not  appropriate  for  him  to  visit
    Pakistan to see his parents, and he allowed the immigration appeal.

Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the appeal was restricted to residual  grounds  contained  in  Sections
    84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    which restricted the appeal rights for visitors coming to visit  family
    members in the UK.  Since  the  claimants  were  independent  of  their
    children and had their own income  family  life  was  not  established;
    there was no presumption of family  life  between  adult  children  and
    their parents unless something exists more than normal emotional  ties.
    Furthermore there was no finding that the visit could not take place in
    a third country.

The hearing

 7. Mr Diwnycz sought guidance from another Senior Presenting  Officer  and
    accepted that the judge was correct to  deal  with  the  refusal  under
    paragraph 320(7B). The judge's findings had not been challenged by  the
    Secretary of State.  He did however submit that the judge had erred  in
    allowing the appeal under paragraph 41  and  otherwise  relied  on  his
    grounds.

Findings and Conclusions

 8. The judge was entitled to deal with the paragraph  320(7B)  ground  for
    refusal  and  to  conclude  that  no  deception  was  employed  by  the
    claimants.  That aspect of his decision shall stand.

 9. However his decision under paragraph 41 is set aside because he had  no
    jurisdiction to deal with the matter following  the  implementation  of
    Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act from 25th June 2013.

10. In order to allow the appeal on human rights grounds the judge  had  to
    ask himself whether there was family life between the claimant and  the
    adult child. In failing to address himself to  the  right  question  he
    erred in  law.  Furthermore  on  the  evidence  there  was  nothing  to
    establish that family life could exist in this case. Accordingly  there
    can be no breach of the appellant's rights  under  Article  8  by  this
    refusal.

Decision

The judge's decision is set aside.  It is remade as follows.

The  decision  under  Section  320(7B)  stands.   However  the  decision  in
relation to paragraph 41 is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

