
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/06453/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 January 2016                        |On 8 March 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - istanbul
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Deniz Mellor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant was born on 9 June 1980 and is female citizen
    of Turkey.  She appealed against a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, Istanbul, to refuse her application for entry clearance to the
    United Kingdom as a visitor, a decision which is dated 1 October  2014.
    The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hindson) in a decision promulgated on 11
    May 2015 allowed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds.   The  ECO  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Hindson clearly had some sympathy for this appellant who  is  the
    daughter-in-law of the United Kingdom sponsor (Mrs Mellor) who appeared
    before Judge Hindson.  The appellant is married to the sponsor's son, a
    British national living in Turkey.  I note that Mr Mellor comes to  the
    United Kingdom during the summer of each year in order  to  work  here.
    It appears that Mr  Mellor's  mother  and  sister  are  prevented  from
    travelling to Turkey for visits  because  of  the  latter's  ill-health
    [18].  Mr Mellor's sister enjoys seeing the appellant  (her  sister-in-
    law) and "is distressed when this does not happen" [18].

 3. Judge Hindson found that this was one of those "rare  cases"  in  which
    Article 8 is engaged.  With respect, I disagree.   As  the  grounds  of
    appeal point out, there is no  actual  finding  in  the  decision  that
    family life capable of attracting the  protection  of  Article  8  ECHR
    exists between the various parties  involved.   In  particular,  it  is
    difficult to see how family life would exist between the two sister-in-
    laws who are not blood relatives  and  between  whom  there  would  not
    appear from the evidence to be any  particularly  strong  ties.   Judge
    Hindson's decision recites no evidence at all that might establish that
    the United Kingdom sponsor (the mother) is unable to leave the  country
    because of his sister's ill-health.

 4. Judge Hindson has done nothing to answer the  questions  which  I  have
    outlined above and has, instead, sought to fall back on Article 8  ECHR
    and to use it (as  the  grounds  accurately  describe)  as  a  "general
    dispensing power."  It is difficult to see how  the  fundamental  human
    right which Article 8 is intended to protect may be  infringed  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision.  In the circumstances, I set  aside
    the judge's decision and remade the decision.  The  appellant's  appeal
    against the ECO's refusal dated 1 October 2014 is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 11 May
    2015 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's appeal
    against the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal  of  1  October  2014  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
