
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/07926/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 March 2014                              |On 2 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                kateryna bute

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - WARSAW

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine born on 20th March 1979.

2.   The appellant sought leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor
    but that was refused in a notice dated 25th April 2013.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Holder  on  11th  October  2013.
    This was an appeal considered on the papers.

4.   Although the Judge found the appellant to be  a  genuine  visitor,  who
    intended to return to the Ukraine, it was found that she did  not  meet
    the other requirements of paragraph 41 of HC  395  given  the  lack  of
    financial information supplied.

5.   The appeal was dismissed.

6.   Grounds of appeal were  submitted  on  the  basis  that  that  approach
    lacked logicality, not only because  the  appellant  had  been  granted
    leave to enter on the same documents before, but also that clearly  the
    means  and  circumstances  as  described  were  more  than  enough   to
    facilitate her travel.  Leave was granted on that basis.

7.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant.

8.   Seemingly, however, and  unknown  to  the  Judge  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had granted entry clearance to the appellant for a family visit
    visa for a duration of five years on 10th September 2013.

9.   Mr Jacks, who represents  the  respondent  handed  me  a  copy  of  the
    application and the grant.  He confirmed that the grant  postdated  the
    Tribunal's decision.

10.  Clearly therefore at the time when the matter  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holder in October 2013 leave had already been granted to
    the appellant and presumably therefore the decision of 25th April  2013
    withdrawn.

11.  Under the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  Rule
    17(2) an appeal should  be  treated  as  withdrawn  if  the  respondent
    notifies the Tribunal that the decision (or where the appeal relates to
    more than one decision, all of  the  decisions)  to  which  the  appeal
    relates has been withdrawn.  Had the Judge known about the  grant  then
    no doubt the file would have been marked appeal withdrawn.

12.  It seems to me therefore that the  Judge  proceeded  under  a  mistaken
    understanding of fact namely  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    maintaining the refusal in the circumstances that clearly  was  capable
    of being a material error of law as set out in the  case  of  ER.[2004]
    EWCA Civ 49  Accordingly I therefore set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    Judge.

13.  That leaves matters at large in the Upper Tribunal.  The withdrawal  by
    one party in such a jurisdiction does not necessarily bring to  an  end
    the proceedings.  I have regard in particular to the recent case of  SM
    (withdrawal of appeal  decision:  effect)  Pakistan  [2014]  UKUT  0064
    (IAC).

14.  However in this case  there  has  not  only  been  a  withdrawal  of  a
    decision but a grant  of  leave  to  enter  and  therefore  clearly  an
    acceptance by the Entry Clearance Officer that the Appellant meets  all
    the requirements of the Rules.  In those circumstances it seems  to  me
    that the justice of the situation is that the appeal should  be  remade
    to the extent that it is allowed in line with the grant of  leave  that
    has been made.

15.  Thus the appeal is allowed without consideration of the merits






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
