
                                    [pic]
Upper-Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/07798/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 23rd January 2017           |On the 1st February 2017           |

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                             MS BAYENESH WELDAIE
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal

Representation:
For the Claimant:      Ms Bustani (Counsel)
For the Secretary of State:  Mr Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS
   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Hussain, promulgated on  the  17th  May  2016,  in
      which he allowed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer's decision to refuse the  Appellant  entry  clearance  to  the
      United Kingdom as a family visitor,  on  Human  Rights  grounds  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR. Within the Grounds of Appeal, it is argued that
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law in finding  that
      family life existed between the Appellant  and  the  sponsor  in  this
      case. The sponsor is the adult daughter of the Appellant,  and  it  is
      argued within the grounds  of  appeal  that  family  life  within  the
      meaning of Article 8 does not  normally  exists  between  parents  and
      adult children, unless there is an element of dependency going  beyond
      "normal emotional ties", following the cases of Kugathas  v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and MS (Article 8-
      Family Life- Dependency-proportionality) Uganda [2004] UK  IAT  00064.
      It is argued that  the  Appellant  is  employed  and  not  financially
      dependent upon the sponsor and there was  no  evidence  of  dependency
      beyond normal emotional ties, such as to constitute  family  life  for
      the purposes of Article 8.


   2.  It  is  further  argued  within  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that   the
      proportionality assessment carried  out  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge is  inadequate and does not explain why the refusal of  a  visit
      visa which would only allow the parties to  get  together  temporarily
      was a disproportionate interference with  the  Appellant's  Article  8
      rights. It is further  argued  that  the  judge  had  found  that  the
      Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules but due to the
      restricted appeal rights he had therefore simply  allowed  the  appeal
      under Article  8  and  was  thereby  using  Article  8  as  a  general
      dispensing power. It is argued that the decision should be set aside.



   3. Permission to appeal has been granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin
      on the  6th January 2017, when she found  that  "it  is  arguable,  as
      asserted in the grounds that the Judge's finding that family life  for
      the purpose of Article 8 between the Appellant  and  her  adult  child
      (the sponsor) is inadequately reasoned in  light  of  Kugathas  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 31 and also that the Judge arguably  erred  in  allowing  the
      appeal on Article 8 grounds simply because he found that the Appellant
      met the Immigration Rules rather than assessing proportionality  as  a
      balancing exercise".

Oral Submissions

   4. In his oral submissions to the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Tufan  relied  upon
      the Grounds of Appeal. He argued that the primary issue was whether or
      not Article 8 (1) was engaged and  following  the  case  of  Kugathas,
      there needed to be dependency over and above ordinary emotional  ties.
      He argued that here the sponsor  was  not  financially  dependent.  He
      referred me to the case of Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry  clearance)
      [2015) UKUT 00112 (IAC), and to paragraph 24 of the decision of  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Perkins and Mr Justice McCloskey, the President of  the
      Upper Tribunal, in which the panel  gave  examples  of  the  types  of
      relationship which would attract protection under Article 8 (1) and to
      the reference that "we are, however, prepared to  say  that  it  would
      only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other than a close
      relative would be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
      comes within the scope of Article 8 (1).  In  practical  terms  it  is
      likely to be limited to  cases  where  the  relationship  is  that  of
      husband and wife and other close life partners  or  to  a  parent  and
      minor child, and even then it will  not  necessarily  be  extended  to
      cases where, for example, the proposed visit is based on a whim or not
      add  significantly  to  the  time  that  the  people  involved   spent
      together".


   5. Mr Tufan argued  that  the  Judge  stating  at  paragraph  15  of  the
      determination that the "closeness of the ties" between the sponsor and
      the Appellant meant that family life was engaged was not the test  and
      the Judge had applied the wrong legal test and that the  decision  was
      materially flawed in that regard.


   6. In her oral submissions, Ms Bustani explained that she had not filed a
      Rule 24 Reply, as the notice of appeal hearing had only been sent  out
      on the 10th January 2017, and she herself had only been instructed  on
      the Friday before the appeal hearing on  the  Monday.  She  sought  to
      argue that there was no material error of law in the decision and that
      the Judge had correctly applied  the  two-stage  approach  in  firstly
      determining whether or not Article 8 was engaged, and then if it  was,
      considering proportionality. She argued that the ability to  meet  the
      Immigration Rules was a weighty  consideration  when  determining  the
      question of proportionality, and sought to argue that in the  case  of
      Mostafa that was a case where a husband wanted to apply  for  a  visit
      visa to see his wife, and that the relationship was very different  in
      that case, and she further argued that in respect of the case of Adjei
      (visit visas-Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261, in that case she argued  that
      there was clearly an error on the part of the Judge  in  allowing  the
      appeal under the Immigration Rules which was very different  from  the
      determination here. She further referred me to the case of Kaur (visit
      appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487 IAC and particularly to paragraphs
      13, 14 and 31 of the decision. She  argued  that  each  case  is  fact
      sensitive. She further argued that the Judge should have  applied  his
      mind and considered that there were more than  normal  emotional  ties
      and that the Judge had clearly taken account  of  5  factors,  in  her
      submission, being the fact that she argued that the  Judge  had  found
      that there was no less than 11 trips over a ten-year period, that  one
      of  the  grandchildren  lived  in  Saudi  Arabia  in  the  Appellant's
      household, the Appellant's age, the fact that financial dependency was
      not a requirement, and the fact that the Appellant could  not  sponsor
      family members to visit her in Saudi  Arabia  because  of  her  status
      there.


   7. Ms Bustani further argued that if there was a material error,  that  I
      should preserve the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hussain  that  the  Appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
      requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  under  paragraph  41  of  the
      Immigration Rules.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   8. In the case of asked Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Lord Justice Sedley accepted  that  the
      approach of the Commission in the case of S v  United  Kingdom  (1984)
      40DR 196 was correct and that as stated by the Commission at page  198
      of the report "generally, the protection of family life under  Article
      8 involves cohabiting dependents, such as parents and their  dependent
      minor children. Whether it extends to other relationships  depends  on
      the circumstances of the particular case. Relationship between adults,
      a mother and her 33-year-old  son  in  the  present  case,  would  not
      necessarily acquire the protection of  Article  8  of  the  Convention
      without evidence of further elements  of  dependency,  involving  more
      than the normal emotional ties".


   9. In the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain,  he  found  that
      there was a "close emotional  bond"  between  the  Appellant  and  her
      daughter, bearing in mind her advanced years and went on to find  that
      "the  assessment  of  family  life  is  not  simply  about   financial
      dependency, but requires a holistic assessment  of  the  closeness  of
      ties between individuals. Taking that approach,  I  am  satisfied  the
      Appellant and sponsor enjoy family life".



  10. As stated by Lord Justice Sedley at [19] of  Kugathas  "Neither  blood
      ties nor the concern and affection that ordinarily go with  them  are,
      by themselves altogether, in my judgement enough to constitute  family
      life. Most of us have close relations of whom we are  extremely  fond,
      and whom we visit or who visit us, from time to time; but none  of  us
      would say on those grounds alone that we share a family life with them
      in any sense capable of coming  within  the  meaning  and  purpose  of
      Article 8". Although First-tier Tribunal Hussain found that there is a
      close emotional bond  between  the  Appellant  and  her  daughter  and
      considers the closeness of the ties between the  individuals,  he  has
      seemingly not applied the correct test as set  out  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Kugathas, as to whether  or  not  there  were  "elements  of
      dependency, involving more than the normal emotional ties."  There  is
      no reference to the case Kugathas and no reference to the test set out
      therein. The learned Judge has not considered whether or not the close
      emotional bond between the Appellant  and  her  daughter  goes  beyond
      normal emotional ties, and has therefore failed to apply  the  correct
      test in determining whether or not Article 8 is engaged in  the  first
      place, before going on to consider whether or not the requirements  of
      paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules were met, which then is  capable
      of being a weighty, though  not  determinative  factor  when  deciding
      whether such  refusal  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
      enforcing immigration control  for  the  purpose  of  Article  8.  The
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain therefore does contain a
      material error of law in that regard.


  11. Further, at [23], Judge Hussain found that "for all the reasons  given
      above, I am satisfied that the Appellant meets the requirements of the
      Immigration Rules. I see no other reason to exclude the Appellant from
      the United Kingdom. As a result, I find the  decision  to  exclude  is
      disproportionate".  However,  there  is  no  reference   within   that
      paragraph or elsewhere within  the  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge Hussain, to the fact that as was stated by the Upper Tribunal in
      the case of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  00112,
      that "the Claimant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules  is  not
      the question to be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being
      a weighty, though not determinative, factor when deciding whether such
      refusal  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate   aim   of   enforcing
      immigration control".



  12. Judge Hussain appears to have simply concluded that the fact that  the
      Appellant met the requirements of the Rules, without any other  reason
      to exclude the Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  meant  that  the
      decision to exclude was disproportionate, and has not taken account of
      the fact that it is a weighty, though not determinative,  factor  when
      deciding whether such refusal is proportionate, and  although  as  was
      stated by the Upper Tribunal in Mostafa "if the persons  circumstances
      do satisfy the Immigration Rules and they have not acted the way  that
      undermines  the  system  of  immigration  control,  refusal  of  entry
      clearance is liable to infringe Article 8".



  13. Judge Hussain has not set  out  what  the  competing  public  interest
      considerations are, that  he  has  taken  into  account,  if  any,  in
      conducting the balancing exercise. Nor has he made  any  reference  to
      Section 117 A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in
      that regard to which the Tribunal must have regard in all  cases  when
      required to determine whether a decision made  under  the  Immigration
      Acts breaches a person's right to  respect  private  and  family  life
      under Article 8 and as a result would be unlawful under Section  6  of
      the Human Rights  Act  1998,  by  virtue  of  Section  117  A  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  learned  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge therefore failed to demonstrate that  he  has  properly
      conducted  the  balancing  exercise  required   in   the   Article   8
      consideration as to whether or not the decision  is  proportionate  or
      not to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved,  and  in  such
      circumstances, his consideration of proportionality in this regard  is
      also inadequately explained. This further amounts to a material  error
      of law.


  14. In such circumstances,  the  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hussain does contain material errors of law and is set aside.



  15. However, I do preserve the findings of  fact  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judges Hussain that on the evidence before him the Appellant was  able
      to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 41 of the  Immigration  Rules
      HC395, as although Mr Tufan sought to argue  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge when making those findings had not refereed to the fact that the
      Appellant had previously applied to settle in the  UK  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had properly, adequately and sufficiently explained his
      reasons in respect of  that  issue  and  as  to  whether  or  not  the
      Appellant thereby did intend to come as a  visitor,  at  [22]  of  his
      decision.



  16.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  further  given  adequate   and
      sufficient reasons for his findings  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
      ability to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration
      Rules. However, clearly, the appeal cannot simply be allowed  on  that
      basis, given the change to the appeal rights. The issue as to  whether
      or not Article 8 is engaged at all in this case, and  if  it  is,  the
      question as to whether or not the decision  is  proportionate  to  the
      legitimate public  end  sought  to  be  achieved  still  needs  to  be
      determined. Given that this will involve a significant degree of fact-
      finding, I remit the case back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  these
      issues to be considered and determined afresh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside, saved for the preserved  findings  of  fact,
referred to above.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  before
any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M.B.
Hussain.



I make no anonymity order; no such order having been sought before me.

Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                 Dated
24th January 2017
