
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/07268/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2016                         |On 4th May 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                           mr muhammad asghar khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEAANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hetherington, promulgated on 6th July 2015, following a  decision
    at Birmingham on 23rd June  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  Judge
    allowed the appeal of Muhammad Asghar  Khan  whereupon  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Grant of Permission

 2. On 20th September 2015, permission to appeal was granted by the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that the Judge had erred in law in  allowing
    the appeal of the Appellant, in that the Judge was wrong to  find  that
    the Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules as well  as
    of Article 8 of the ECHR.  Since 25th June 2013 Grounds of  Appeal  for
    visit visa appeals  have  been  restricted  to  human  rights  or  race
    relations grounds.

 3. The case of Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261  makes  it
    clear that the primary question is whether Article 8  of  the  ECHR  is
    engaged for visitor appeals at all.  It will infrequently be  involved.
    If it is not involved then the Tribunal does not have  jurisdiction  to
    embark upon an assessment of the decision of the ECO  under  the  Rules
    and should not do so.

 4. In the instant case,  at  paragraph  22  of  his  decision,  the  Judge
    concluded that there is family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor who are two adults but he  has  not  given  clear  reasons  for
    making that finding.

The Submissions

 5. At the hearing before me on 12th February 2016, Mr Mills, appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, submitted that the Judge had erred in  law  because
    the only right of appeal since 25th  June  2013  was  on  human  rights
    grounds or on racial grounds.  The hearing in this matter was  in  June
    2015 and the President's  guidance  in  Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 and in Adjei [2015] UKUT  0261  was  clear
    that appeal rights were restricted quite dramatically after 2015.

 6. The Sponsor in this case was an adult daughter of the  Appellant.   The
    presumption in Mostafa is that Article 8 is  not  engaged.   The  Judge
    should have started with  that  presumption  that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged.  Instead, at paragraph 22 the Judge begins  from  the  premise
    that "everyone has the right to respect  for  his  private  and  family
    life, his income and  his  correspondence"  and  that  "the  obligation
    imposed by Article 8 is to promote the family life of those affected by
    the decision" (paragraph 22).

 7. There had to be a level of dependency going beyond the  normal  between
    the Appellant adult daughter and her father.  This had not been  shown.



 8. Accordingly, the appeal could not have been allowed under Article 8.

 9. For the Appellant, there was in attendance  Dr  Ghazal,  the  medically
    qualified doctor daughter of the Appellant.   She  submitted  that  her
    father had made five trips to see her in  the  UK  and  that  they  had
    always respected the law and will continue to do so and no matter  what
    happens.  She submitted that she was only asked for a simple visit from
    him.  She was a single parent.  She said that she had two children  and
    one of them was diagnosed with special needs and  had  severe  problems
    and the second one, recently born, was also  showing  signs  of  having
    such a disability as to require a  special  needs  certification.   She
    needed her own father to be here to provide her with some  support  now
    and again because she had no-one else and her father had visited in the
    past and there was a family life between her children and her father.

10. In reply Mr Mills submitted that there has now been a limited right  of
    appeal in visitor visa cases.  The Judge had  ignored  that  limitation
    and had allowed the appeal by engaging  in  a  freestanding  Article  8
    exercise.  Whether or not the Sponsor would honour  and  recognise  the
    importance of immigration controls and  return  back  to  Pakistan  was
    entirely relevant.  What matters is whether Article 8 is engaged.   The
    leading case has now made it clear that it was not engaged.   This  was
    the presumption and the Judge had to start with the presumption.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  Judge  did  not
    involve the making of  an  error  of  law,  notwithstanding  Mr  Mills'
    succinct and  measured  submissions  before  me.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

12. First, this is a case where the Appellant's eldest child  has  a  sleep
    disorder and severe intellectual disorder, as the Judge found, and  his
    mental age is eighteen months, although he is aged  9  years.   He  has
    challenging behaviour.  He does not communicate.  The second child,  is
    aged 7 years, but is suspected of having mild autism and has yet to  be
    diagnosed (see paragraph 10).

13. The Appellant's Sponsor, Dr Ghazal, cares  for  the  children  herself.
    She works as a hospital doctor.  She has no  friends  and  she  has  no
    social life (see paragraph 11).  Given the family  situation  at  home,
    the Judge found that, "it would be impossible for Dr Ghazal, along with
    her children, to fly to visit the Appellant in Pakistan" (see paragraph
    13).

14. On the other hand, the Appellant, the father  of  Dr  Ghazal,  and  the
    grandfather of the two children, has visited the  United  Kingdom  five
    times  since  2008,  and  the  Judge  observed  that,  "he  has   never
    overstayed.  Dr Ghazal said that she  guaranteed  the  Appellant  would
    return to Pakistan at the end of the period of  the  visit"  (paragraph
    14).

15. In an earlier Tribunal appeal, when the  Appellant  also  succeeded  in
    securing his visit visa, Judge Broe in a decision promulgated  on  22nd
    August 2015, had said that "he has no  reservations  at  all  about  Dr
    Ghazal's credibility.  She was frank and gave honest answers to all  of
    the questions asked her" (see paragraph 15).

16. Judge Hetherington in the instant appeal also said that, "I do have  no
    hesitation in finding that I have  no  reservations  at  all  about  Dr
    Ghazal's credibility" (paragraph 16).

17. The essential question, however, is whether Article 8 is engaged.   The
    general position, well set out in established cases, is that  there  is
    no Article 8 right to visit.  Normally it is possible for the people in
    the UK to just as well visit the friends and relatives in  the  foreign
    country.  This is plainly not the case here, and  the  Judge  so  found
    (see paragraph 20).  As  the  Judge  observed  the  Appellant's  eldest
    child's behaviour

         "is so extreme that for his protection he constantly wears a helmet
         to prevent his injuring himself when he engages  in  head  banging.
         If Dr Ghazal's elder son were to be taken to an airport, and/or  on
         a long flight, he would not merely be  disorderly  and  disruptive,
         such a course of action would be intolerable for Dr Ghazal and  all
         others  generally  both  at  the  airports  and  on  the   flights"
         (paragraph 21).

18. However, even more importantly than this, the Judge recognised that  in
    the instant case, with the Appellant having made  five  visits  in  the
    past to come and see Dr Ghazal and the  children,  that  there  was  an
    established family life between them (see para 22), and it was in  this
    context that the present appeal was being heard.

19. Judge Hetherington observed that, "Dr Ghazal and her children  like  to
    share the Appellant's life and relationship as  they  have  been  doing
    within the short lives thus far ..." (see paragraph 22).

20. In Mostafa, the Tribunal made it quite clear that Article 8  cases  are
    fact sensitive.  The factual circumstances  in  the  instant  case  are
    plainly very different from what one  would  encounter  in  most  visit
    cases.  In Mostafa, the Tribunal stated that,

         "it would ... be extremely foolish to attempt to  be  prescriptive,
         given the intensely factual and  contextual  sensitivity  of  every
         case.  Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in this type of  case,
         any particular  kind  of  relationship  would  always  retract  the
         protection of Article 8(1) or  that  other  kinds  of  relationship
         would never come within its scope" (see paragraph 24).

21. This was the position here.  The Appellant's daughter, Dr  Ghazal,  has
    two children, both of whom are very challenging and have severe  health
    problems.  She has no friends and she  has  no  social  life.   She  is
    entirely dependent upon the help that her father gives when he arrives.
     He has been to this country no less than five times recently  and  has
    returned back every time.  Two previous judges have taken the view that
    Dr Ghazal is a person of integrity and her credibility is unassailable.
     When appeal have been allowed and the Appellant has entered the UK  as
    a visitor, he has always then returned back to  Pakistan.   This  is  a
    fact that no decision-maker can ignore.   In  these  circumstances  the
    Judge was entitled to conclude as he did.



Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  Judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th April 2016


                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Deputy Judge issuing      |Professor S S Juss                |
|approval:                         |                                  |
|Appellant's Name:                 |Muhammad Asghar Khan              |
|Case Number:                      |VA/07268/2014                     |

Oral decision (please indicate) X


I approve the attached Decision and Reasons for promulgation

Name:    Professor Satvinder Juss

Date:    28th April 2016


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |



