
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/07233/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD DIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Darvishzadeh, of Ethnic Minorities Law
Centre, Edinburgh
For the Respondent:    Miss S Aitken, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The applicant is a citizen of Pakistan, whose date of birth is recorded
    as 1 January 1942.  He applied for a family visit visa, naming  his  UK
    relatives as his daughter, granddaughter and grandson.  The  respondent
    refused that application by notice dated 14  October  2014,  not  being
    satisfied that the appellant is a genuine visitor who would  leave  the
    UK once admitted.

 2. It is not entirely clear from the papers  on  file  what  evidence  was
    before  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  what  was  produced  later
    regarding the alleged difficulty or impossibility  of  the  appellant's
    daughter travelling to visit him.  The original application does appear
    to have included a statement by his granddaughter  (dated  9  September
    2014) saying that her mother is "currently unwell" and her  grandfather
    can see her only by travelling to the UK.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer's decision says at the second bullet  point
    that there are no insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  "your  sponsor
    from visiting you in Pakistan".  The sponsor stated in the  application
    appears to be his granddaughter, although the reference in the decision
    may be rather to his daughter.

 4. A letter from the appellant's daughter's GP dated 12 May 2015 is in the
    appeal bundle submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.   This  shows  that
    Mrs Bibi has suffered from bronchiectasis since at least 1989 (when she
    had a lobectomy) and states that it would be "unwise for her to  travel
    on long air flights because of the bronchiectasis."

 5. Judge Hutchinson dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  determination
    promulgated on 29 May 2015.  The judge found at paragraph 15  that  the
    relationship between the appellant and his daughter or any other family
    in the UK did not go beyond normal ties among adult relatives.  Article
    8 was therefore not engaged.

 6. The judge went  on  to  find  in  the  alternative  that  the  evidence
    regarding Mrs Bibi's inability to travel had been  exaggerated  by  her
    and by her daughter, particularly as she had been able to travel in the
    past, and in absence of further detailed information from the GP.

 7. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT submit that the judge  gave
    inadequate   consideration   to    submissions    and    evidence    on
    proportionality; adopted an unreasonably narrow interpretation  of  the
    nature of the family relationship; there was a  legitimate  expectation
    for father and child to visit each other, particularly where the mother
    of the child passed away while the child was very young; the ability to
    visit a sick child was capable of forming a protected aspect of  family
    or private life; the breadth of protection available was illustrated by
    Mostapha (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  00112;  the  judge
    failed to consider the implications  of  the  evidence;  no  reasonable
    judge would have  concluded  that  a  decade  might  reasonably  elapse
    between visits, particularly as the appellant is now aged  73  and  his
    daughter medically unwell.

 8. A judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal on  the
    view that the judge might have failed to have sufficient regard to  the
    views of the appellant's daughter's GP on her fitness  to  travel,  and
    might have failed to apply both  Mostapha  and  Adjei  (visit  visas  -
    Article 8) 2015 UKUT 00261.

 9. Miss Darvishzadeh had usefully prepared  her  submissions  in  writing.
    These follow the lines of the grounds.  It is  accepted  that  Mostapha
    does not concern a relationship with an adult child, but it  is  argued
    that in the  circumstances  of  this  case  the  relationship  forms  a
    protected  aspect  of  family  or  private  life,  given  the  "unusual
    circumstances" of the daughter having lost her mother when very  young,
    the strong bond  which  continued  between  father  and  daughter,  the
    daughter's medical condition such that she is advised  against  a  long
    flight, and the common human and natural wish for a  visit  between  an
    aging parent and a sick child.  The argument seeks to distinguish  this
    case  from  Adjei  in  that  there  is  no  suitable  alternative   for
    maintaining the relationship.  The  judge  ought  to  have  found  that
    Article 8  was  engaged.   The  Tribunal  should  have  carried  out  a
    balancing exercise in respect of the appellant's ability to satisfy the
    Immigration Rules and the human rights grounds.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer  had  accepted  that  the   appellant's   granddaughter   could
    adequately maintain and accommodate  him  without  recourse  to  public
    funds.  The only matter in dispute [in terms of the Rules] was  whether
    the appellant demonstrated sufficient ties to Pakistan.  He  owns  land
    there and had produced letters of support from his  sons  in  Pakistan,
    family photographs, and so on.

10. Summing up for the  appellant,  Miss  Darvishzadeh  accepted  that  the
    appellant would have to show that he could both meet the terms  of  the
    Rules, and make out his case under Article  8.   For  all  the  reasons
    given, she submitted that he had done so and that the determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal should be reversed.

11. Miss Aitken submitted that Adjei  made  it  clear  that  the  appellant
    firstly had to show that Article 8  was  engaged,  and  breached  to  a
    possibly disproportionate extent, before turning to the requirements of
    the Rules.  This case did not meet the first requirement.  The evidence
    failed to show that family life existed for Article 8  purposes.   That
    was a finding open to the judge and properly  reached,  and  everything
    else in the determination was in the alternative.  This case involved a
    sponsor aged 50, born in 1965, who came here to get married and had her
    family here.  She has returned to Pakistan only 4 times.  There  was  a
    relationship between an adult parent and an adult child,  but  not  one
    which engaged Article 8.  They had  carried  on  a  long  distance  and
    intermittent relationship through the choices made  in  the  course  of
    life.  In Mostapha at paragraph 24 it was held that it would  "only  be
    in very unusual circumstances that a person other than a close relative
    will be able to show that refusal of entry clearance comes  within  the
    scope of Article 8(1).  In practical terms this is likely to be limited
    to cases where the relationship is that of husband and  wife  or  other
    close life partners are a partner and minor child ..."  This was not  a
    case showing any such exceptional circumstances.  The medical  symptoms
    went back over 26 years, and covered a period during which the daughter
    had made at least 2 of her visits to Pakistan.

12. Miss Aitken agreed with my observations that the  judge's  comments  on
    meeting in Europe and on visits  at  intervals  of  a  decade  appeared
    somewhat strained, but she  submitted  that  they  showed  no  material
    error.

13. Ms Darvishzadeh in reply said that although the medical report had been
    available only after the grounds of appeal were filed, the  information
    about it being unwise for the  daughter  to  travel  was  part  of  the
    original application.  This was a  longstanding  condition.   It  could
    reasonably be inferred that although she had felt well enough to  visit
    Pakistan in the past, she could not contemplate doing  so  now.   There
    was no good reason in the determination for  finding  the  evidence  on
    that aspect to be exaggerated.   It  was  a  significant  consideration
    whether father and daughter might be able to see each other ever again.



14. I reserved my determination.

15. Everything that might properly be advanced has been advanced on  behalf
    of the appellant, both in the First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  However, I find that the respondent's first point is a  good
    one: the case does not get past the judge's finding  that  family  life
    had not been shown for Article 8 purposes.

16. The family life generally  protected  by  Article  8  is  that  between
    spouses (or similar partners in life) and  between  parents  and  minor
    children.  Whether family life extends beyond that is a  question  both
    of law and of fact, but primarily of fact, for a judge  in  each  case.
    As indicated at paragraph 24  of  Mostapha,  cases  are  likely  to  be
    limited to  those  classes  of  relationship  unless  in  very  unusual
    circumstances.   The  circumstances  here  are  sympathetic,  but   not
    unusual.  The judge was  entitled  to  find  that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged, for the reasons she gave.  That is decisive of the case.

17. The judge heard the witnesses.  She did not find them to be downrightly
    unreliable, but to be  exaggerating  the  medical  difficulties.   That
    finding was open to her on all the evidence, and the explanation  given
    has not been shown to be less than  legally  adequate.   (It  is  plain
    enough that the difficulties of visiting Pakistan were being  made  the
    most of; the evidence as a whole does not suggest that the  appellant's
    daughter might not travel,  breaking  her  journey  if  necessary  into
    "short hops".)

18. It is also questionable whether the appellant had brought  evidence  to
    show that the case met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   The
    judge did not express a view on that.  In light of Adjei, she was right
    not to do so; but it is at least  in  the  balance  whether  any  other
    outcome might have been achieved.

19. The appellant  and  his  relatives  understandably  disagree  with  the
    outcome of the case, but they have not shown it to be legally flawed in
    any way which might entitle the UT to interfere.

20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




                    [pic]


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                    29 October 2015
