
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/07236/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th May 2016                              |On 1st June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               mr MD Gias Miah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Rana of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State and so  I  shall
    refer to Mr Miah as the Claimant.  His appeal to be  allowed  to  enter
    the UK to visit his brother was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Atreya in a decision promulgated on 15th October 2015.  The Grounds  of
    Appeal  note  that  the  appeal  was  restricted  to  residual  grounds
    contained  in  Section  84(1)(b)  and  (c)  of  the  2002  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act.   The  grounds  state  that  there  was  a
    material misdirection of law by the judge who had  not  explained  that
    additional dependency existed such as to engage Article 8.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the appeal came before me  on
    the above date.

 3. For the Home Office reliance was placed on the grounds.  The judge  did
    not explain how the ties  between  the  brothers  exceeded  the  normal
    emotional ties.  I was asked to set the decision aside and dismiss  the
    Claimant's appeal.

 4. For the Claimant Mr Rana submitted that the judge had produced  a  very
    careful decision.  She had dealt  with  the  relationship  between  the
    parties.  She had noted that they had been  separated  for  six  years.
    She had found that there was family life.   She  had  referred  to  and
    applied the appropriate case law namely Kaur (visit  appeals/Article  8
    ECHR) [2015] UKUT 487.  The judge had applied the letter of the law and
    there was no error.

 5. I reserved my decision.

Decision

 6. The judge was impressed  by  the  honesty  of  the  Claimant's  younger
    brother (paragraph 22) and accepted that their  relationship  was  more
    akin "to father and son" in view of the Claimant's  role  as  a  father
    figure after their father died.  He noted that  the  brothers  had  not
    seen each other for six years and the reason for the visit was  to  see
    his  brother's  baby.   He  accepted  that  the  Claimant  would  be  a
    grandfather figure to the Sponsor's child and the child  is  his  first
    child.  The judge correctly noted that the burden of proof remained  on
    the Claimant and found that the relationship between the  Claimant  and
    his brother did amount to family life because the Claimant was a father
    figure to his younger brother.  As the  judge  correctly  noted  family
    life is not confined to parents  and  children  and  can  include  ties
    between other relatives.

 7. The judge went on to note, correctly, that the Claimant  did  meet  the
    terms of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  She then  went  on  to
    apply the case of Kaur going on to allow the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 8. The judge gave clear  reasons  why  she  considered  that  family  life
    existed between the brothers.  There is no general proposition that  in
    Article 8 cases family life can never be  engaged  between  brothers  -
    each case must be fact-sensitive.  In this appeal the judge gave  clear
    reasons why she considered the relationship between the brothers to  be
    a very close one capable of engaging Article 8.  She applied the law as
    set out in Kaur finding that the Claimant did meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  She  found  that  the  Claimant
    only intended a family visit and would return back to Bangladesh at the
    end of the visit.  He would meet the financial requirements.   She  was
    at pains to express the close relationship between the Claimant and his
    brother.  There is no error of law in the decision which must stand.  I
    see no need for an anonymity order.







Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

10. I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 1 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
