

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/07566/2013

                                                         VA/07567/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd September 2014                         |On 11th September 2014       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between


     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (RABAT)    Appellant

                                     and

                           MASTER FADL BAKKALI        Claimants
                              MISS LINA BAKKALI

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble ( Home Office Presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   This matter comes before me to consider whether or not  there  is  a
      material error of law in the First Tier Tribunal decision.  This is an
      appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (SSHD)
      against a determination promulgated on 24 April  2014  by  First  Tier
      Tribunal (Judge Stokes) who allowed the appeals under the  Immigration
      Rules as family visitors pursuant to paragraph 41 HC 395(as amended).


   2.   The claimants are minors, whose dates of  birth  are  4.10.2010  and
      24.6.2012, and are citizens of Morocco.  Their  father  was  the  main
      claimant.  His appeal and that of his wife  (as  dependent)  was  also
      allowed under the rules by the Tribunal. The father was the brother of
      the sponsor and met the requirements of  Immigration  Appeals  (Family
      visitor) Regulations 2012.

   3.   The reasons for refusal in respect of the main  claimant  relied  on
      paragraph  41(i)(ii)(vi)(vii)  raising  concerns   as   to    finances
      circumstances.  The same reasons for refusal were relied  on  for  the
      claimants applications and reference was made to paragraph  46(a)(iv);
      failing to demonstrate suitable arrangements for travel. The notice of
      immigration decisions gave a limited right  of  appeal  under  section
      84(1)(c) Nationality Immigration & Asylum Act 2002.

   4.    The Tribunal directed that the four appeals be  heard  together  as
      the claimants were family members, pursuant to  Rule  20  (b)  of  the
      Asylum & Immigration Tribunal Procedure Rules 2005 (as  amended)  [6].
      The Tribunal Judge proceeded on that basis  and had regard to the fact
      that the  claimants  were  dependants  [1].  The  Tribunal  Judge  had
      evidence of finances and  heard from the sponsor[19-21].  She  allowed
      the appeal of the main claimant and his dependants including his  wife
      and children. The Tribunal Judge found  that  the  requirements  under
      paragraph 46(vi) were met. The Tribunal Judge concluded that Article 8
      was not engaged as family life in the  UK  had  not  been  established
      between the claimants and the sponsor.

   Grounds of appeal

   5.  The grounds of appeal argued that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to
      hear the claimants appeals which attracted a limited right  of  appeal
      only.   Their  applications  were  made  after  the  introduction   of
      Immigration Appeals (Family visitor) Regulations 2012.  The  claimants
      did not come within the class of persons defined as a  family  member.
      The sponsor was their uncle.

      Permission

   6.   Permission was granted on 13.6.2014 that the grounds  were  arguable
      and that the Judge failed to make findings under Article 8 ECHR.

      Hearing


   7.   At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf  of
      the appellants.  The Tribunal clerk made contact with  the  solicitors
      for the claimants who stated that the sponsor was out of  the  country
      and his return was delayed.  Notices  of  hearing  were  sent  to  the
      solicitors as representatives.  I decided that  to  proceed  with  the
      hearing. Not to do so would be unfair or prejudicial to the  claimants
      having regard to the discreet nature of  the  legal  argument  in  the
      grounds of appeal.


      Submissions

   8.    I heard submissions from Mr Bramble. He accepted that  this  was  a
      family application involving  dependents.  In  the  normal  course  of
      events  the  ECO  would  have  automatically  granted  leave  to   the
      dependents of the main appellant following his successful appeal. That
      had not happened.


   9.  Mr Bramble submitted that the Judge ought properly to have considered
      the issue of jurisdiction and the limited right of appeal and  whether
      Article 8 ECHR was engaged.

      Discussion and decision

  10.  I am satisfied that the determination discloses no material error  of
      law. The Judge properly treated the appeals  as  linked  because  they
      related to the same family and the claimants as  young  children  were
      dependent  on  their  parents  in  every  sense  of  the  word.    The
      applications and appeals of the wife and claimants were  dependant  on
      the outcome of the appeal of the  father  who  had  a  full  right  of
      appeal.  This was not an application by child visitors under paragraph
      46 of the Rules; the terms of which are drafted to cover  applications
      made by children travelling independently of their parents  or  family
      members.  It is arguable that the Secretary of State's decision  under
      paragraph 46 was not in accordance  with  the  law.  The  reasons  for
      refusal given were premised on those given  in  respect  of  the  main
      claimant, the father and treated as a joint  application  and  appeal.
      The Judge in such circumstances was not required to  consider  section
      84(1)(c) 2002 Act and it is of note that this was not  raised  by  the
      Secretary of State at the hearing.


   Decision


  11.  I find no error of law in the determination.
  12.  The determination shall stand.
  13.  I direct that the Secretary of State to issue entry clearance for the
      claimants as family visitors in order to give effect to  the  Tribunal
      determination


   Signed                  Date 9.9.2014


     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

     No anonymity order

    To the respondent

    Fee award in full made .




    Signed                      Date 9.9.2014



    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
