

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/07369/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 February 2014                            |On 17 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - AMMAN


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ABDULKADER ALBADRA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Albadra, Sponsor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge Afako) which, in a determination  promulgated  on
      18 October 2013, allowed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer's decision on 28 March 2013 refusing  to  grant  him
      entry clearance under para 41 of the  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as
      amended), in order to visit his daughter, Ms Dima Albadra.

   2. Although this  is  an  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for
      convenience I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal.

Background

   3. The appellant is a citizen of Syria as is his daughter,  the  sponsor.
      The sponsor is a Tier 4 (Student) in the UK.  She came to  the  UK  on
      October 2010 when she was 23 years of  age  and  undertook  a  Masters
      degree in Architecture at the University of Bath.   She  is  currently
      studying for a PhD in Architecture.

   4. On 27 February 2013, the appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  in
      order to visit the sponsor in the UK for 20  days.   In  refusing  the
      appellant's application on 28 March 2013, the ECO did not accept  that
      the appellant was a genuine visitor who intended to leave at  the  end
      of  his  visit  or  that  he  would  be  adequately   maintained   and
      accommodated in the UK and could  pay  for  the  cost  of  his  return
      journey.  Consequently, the ECO refused  the  application  under  para
      41(i), (ii), (vi) and (vii).  That  decision  was  maintained  by  the
      Entry Clearance Manager on 2 June 2013.

   5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant only
      had limited appeal rights because the appeal was governed by s.88A  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.     The  appellant's
      situation did not fall within the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor)
      Regulations 2012 (SI 2012/1532).   This was because, although  he  had
      the requisite relationship as the father of the sponsor (see reg  2(1)
      and (2)(a)), the circumstances of the  sponsor  did  not  fall  within
      regulation 3 (as required by reg 2(1)(b)) as she did not have  settled
      status in the UK being here only with temporary  leave  as  a  Tier  4
      student.  As a result, the appellant could only appeal on human rights
      and race  relations  grounds.  He  could  not  rely  directly  on  the
      Immigration Rules, in particular para 41 (see s.88A(1) and (3)).

   6. Consequently before Judge Afako the appellant relied upon Article 8 of
      the ECHR.  A claim based upon race relations grounds was  not  pursued
      although Judge Afako did remark that any such claim was made out  (see
      para 21 of the determination).

   7. The  appeal  turned,  therefore,  on  whether  the  refusal  of  entry
      clearance was a breach of Art 8.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

   8. Having set out some of the evidence and the appellant's claim, at para
      11 Judge Afako found that  the  appellant  and  his  daughter  enjoyed
      family life and the ECO's refusal of entry clearance  interfered  with
      that family life so as to engage Article 8.1.  Judge Afako  said  this
      at [11]:

           "11.  With regard to article 8, having regard  to  the  step-by-
                 step Razgar approach, the first composite question here  is
                 whether  the  decision  entails  an  interference  with   a
                 protected right of sufficient gravity to engage article  8.
                 The refusal of the application of  course  means  that  the
                 appellant cannot come to the  United  Kingdom  to  see  his
                 daughter.  It seems to me  that  there  is  a  family  life
                 between the appellant and his  daughter,  who  is  a  young
                 student in the United Kingdom, although  I  expect  she  is
                 over the age of 18.  The family life endures in  this  case
                 because the appellant and his  wife  are  supporting  their
                 daughter through her education and she remains very much  a
                 part of the family and is their dependant.   The  need  for
                 the support of her parents also arises,  as  the  appellant
                 explains, because their country is  at  war  and  this  has
                 (unsurprisingly)  had  a  psychological   impact   on   the
                 appellant's daughter, hence the need for  frequent  visits.
                 Whether viewed as family or private life, I  consider  that
                 article 8 is engaged on these facts, and one must also take
                 into account the adverse impact that the  decision  has  on
                 the appellant's daughter, who consequently suffers  greater
                 isolation at a difficult time,  although  she  is  lawfully
                 here in the United Kingdom."

   9. Judge Afako then  turned  to  Article  8.2  and,  in  particular,  the
      requirement that the ECO's decision should be "in accordance with  the
      law".  As regards that, at para 12 of his  determination  Judge  Afako
      reasoned that the decision could not be "in accordance with  the  law"
      if in fact the appellant satisfied the requirements of the Immigration
      Rules, namely para 41.  He said this:

           "12.  The next key  question  is  whether  the  decision  is  in
                 accordance with the law.  This  question  is  not  answered
                 simply by pointing to a legitimate framework for making the
                 decision or  to  the  formalities:  it  involves,  too,  an
                 assessment of whether  the  law  applicable  was  correctly
                 applied.  In an immigration case, a decision which  is  not
                 sustainable by reference to the immigration rules cannot be
                 in accordance with the law.  When faced with an  article  8
                 challenge to an immigration  decision,  the  lawfulness  of
                 that decision cannot be assumed."

  10. Consequently, at paras 13-19, Judge Afako considered the  requirements
      of para 41 for entry clearance as a visitor  and  concluded  that  the
      appellant met those requirements.  He accepted that the appellant  was
      a genuine visitor who would leave at the end of his visit and that  he
      had sufficient means to be adequately maintained and  accommodated  in
      the UK and to pay for his return fare.   The Judge's reasons  were  as
      follows:

           "13.  In this  case,  therefore,  consideration  of  the  second
                 Razgar question requires an appraisal of whether the  facts
                 of the case as at the time of the decision held against the
                 provisions of the rules required that  entry  clearance  be
                 issued to the appellant.

             14. In this case, this requires an examination of  the  reasons
                 for  the  decision.   The  respondent   placed   particular
                 reliance on the fact although it was stated that he is  the
                 Managing Director of a Water  Treatment  Plant  in  Aleppo,
                 Syria, that the appellant  seemed  to  be  outside  of  his
                 country Syria, which is acknowledged to be in  a  stage  of
                 turmoil, and  the  appellant  appears  to  be  residing  in
                 Jordan.  In fact the appellant  counters  that  he  is  not
                 residing in Jordan, although his son  and  wife  are  based
                 there.  He also points to  his  passport,  which  indicates
                 that he has been travelling back  and  forth  from  Jordan.
                 There has been no response to these assertions although the
                 entry clearance manager was aware of them.  For my  part  I
                 accept that he continues  to  have  business  interests  in
                 Syria and in the region.  One of the issues that might  not
                 have been fully comprehended was that the appellant  is  in
                 fact a businessman, and not merely an employee as the ECM's
                 decision appeared to apprehend.

             15.  The  question  of  where  the  applicant  resides  is  not
                 determinative of the key issue under  paragraph  41(i)  and
                 (ii) which focus on the applicant's bona fides in asserting
                 that they intend a visit for a limited period only.

             16. I note that the respondent has not taken into  account  the
                 fact (which is highly relevant to his bona fides)  that  he
                 has previously visited and left the United Kingdom, without
                 any suggestion of a breach of the terms of his  leave.   He
                 had also travelled in Europe as the  documents  he  submits
                 indicates.

             17. As for the question of maintenance and accommodation,  once
                 is accepted (as I have done) that the  appellant's  intends
                 only visits for a limited period to see his daughter,  then
                 the question becomes whether he can afford to come  to  the
                 United Kingdom.

             18. Here too, the evidence is clear that  the  appellant  is  a
                 person of sufficient  means  to  afford  a  visit  to  this
                 country.  Not only is he able to maintain his wife and  son
                 in  Jordan  but  his  is  putting  his   daughter   through
                 university in this country as a foreign  student.   He  has
                 produced his bank accounts.  There is no question  that  he
                 and his wife can afford to visit the United Kingdom.

             19. The evidence for all of the above is very clear  and  there
                 ought properly only  to  have  been  one  outcome  to  this
                 application on the facts.   Accordingly,  I  must  conclude
                 that the decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law,
                 national security, public safety or the economic well-being
                 of the country.  No allegation has been made in  this  case
                 relating to public safety or protection concerns."

  11. On that basis, Judge Afako allowed the appeal under Article 8  as  the
      decision was not "in accordance with the law".

  12. In addition, at para 20 Judge Afako expressed a tentative  view  that,
      in any event, the ECO's refusal  to  grant  entry  clearance  was  not
      proportionate.  He said this:

           "20.  This is a genuine family visit to the appellant's daughter
                 who is living away from her family in  circumstances  where
                 the conflict in her home country is doubtless causing her a
                 certain amount of anxiety, as asserted in  the  grounds  of
                 appeal.  The effect of the decision on her is also a matter
                 to be taken into account, and I accept that the refusal  to
                 allow her father to see her has a deleterious effect on her
                 stay and studies in the United  Kingdom,  and  would  be  a
                 further reason for setting  aside  the  decision,  had  the
                 matter to be determined by reference to  a  proportionality
                 assessment."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

  13. The  ECO  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
      essentially two grounds.  First, the Judge had been wrong to allow the
      appeal under Article 8.  He had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
      doing so, in particular, he had failed to take into account  that  the
      appellant could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.   Secondly,
      the Judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for  finding  that  the
      refusal of entry clearance was disproportionate.

  14. On 20 November 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Cheales)  granted
      the ECO permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

  15. The appellant was  not  legally  represented  but  his  daughter,  the
      sponsor, attended and made submissions on the appellant's behalf.

  16. Mr Richards essentially made three submissions.  First,  he  submitted
      that the Judge had been wrong to find that the ECO's decision was  not
      in accordance with the law simply because the Judge had taken the view
      that on the facts the appellant succeeded under the Immigration Rules,
      namely para 41.  Secondly, he submitted that the  Judge  had  provided
      inadequate reasoning for his  findings  that  the  appellant  and  his
      daughter had family life and that the decision to refuse a  visit  was
      an interference which engaged Article 8.1.  Thirdly, he submitted that
      if the Judge had erred in law then I should remake  the  decision  and
      dismiss the appeal under Article 8.

Discussion

  17. It is common ground in this appeal that the appellant's appeal to  the
      First-tier Tribunal was limited to human  rights  and  race  relations
      grounds by virtue of the combined effect of s.88A of the 2002 Act  and
      the Family Visitor Regulations 2012.  It is not necessary,  therefore,
      for me to set those out here.

  18. The first issue is whether Judge Afako erred in law in paragraph 12 of
      his determination in concluding that, for the purposes of Article 8.2,
      an interference with an individual's  family  life  will  not  be  "in
      accordance with the law" if the Entry Clearance Officer was  wrong  to
      find that the individual did not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules
      and, in fact, the individual does  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
      relevant rules.

  19. The meaning of the phrase "in accordance with the law" is found in the
      Strasbourg jurisprudence.  The European Convention on Human Rights  is
      an international treaty.  As such, the phrase "in accordance with  the
      law" must be given an autonomous meaning equally applicable in each of
      the countries of the Council of Europe in which the Convention applies
      (see R v SSHD  ex p Adan and Aitseguer [2001] 2 AC 477).

  20. The Strasbourg Court has  addressed  on  a  number  of  occasions  the
      question of the meaning of the Convention phrase "in  accordance  with
      the law" or an alternative phrase of  "prescribed  by  law"  which  is
      understood to bare  the  same  meaning  (see,  Human  Rights  Law  and
      Practice (3rd edn 2009) (eds Lester, Pannick  and  Herberg)  at  paras
      3.14 and 4.8.88).  The Strasbourg case law makes plain that the phrase
      encompasses a "principle of legality".  The case law was summarised by
      Lord Hope in R (Purdy) v DPP [2010] 1 AC 345; [2009] UKHL 45  at  [40]
      as follows:

           "40.  The Convention principle of legality requires the court to
                 address itself to three distinct questions.  The  first  is
                 whether there is a legal basis  in  domestic  law  for  the
                 restriction.  The second is whether  the  law  or  rule  in
                 question is sufficiently accessible to the  individual  who
                 is affected by the restriction, and sufficiently precise to
                 enable  him  to  understand  its  scope  and  foresee   the
                 consequences of his actions so that  he  can  regulate  his
                 conduct without breaking the law.  The  third  is  whether,
                 assuming that these two requirements are satisfied,  it  is
                 nevertheless open to the criticism that it is being applied
                 in a way that is arbitrary because,  for  example,  it  has
                 been resorted to in  bad  faith  or  in  way  that  is  not
                 proportionate.  I derive these principles, which have  been
                 mentioned many times in subsequent cases, from Sunday Times
                 v United Kingdom (1972) 2 EHRR 245, para 49 and  also  from
                 Winterwerp v The Netherlands (1979) 2 EHRR   387,  pp  402-
                 403, para 39, Engel v The Netherlands (No 1) (1976) 1  EHRR
                 647, p 669, paras 58-59  which  were   concerned  with  the
                 principle of legality  in  the  context  of  article  5(1),
                 Silver v United Kingdom (1983) 5  EHRR  347,  paras  85-90;
                 Liberty v United Kingdom (2008) 48  EHRR  1,  para  59  and
                 Sorvisto v Finland, Application  No  19348/04,  13  January
                 2009, para 112."

  21. At [41] Lord Hope provided some colour to the  three  requirements  of
      'legality' (a legal basis; accessibility;  arbitrary  application)  as
      follows:

           "41.  The word "law" in this context is to be understood in  its
                 substantive sense, not its formal one:  Kafkaris  v  Cyprus
                 (2008) 25 BHRC 591, para 139.  This  qualification  of  the
                 concept is important, as it makes it  clear  that  law  for
                 this purpose goes beyond the mere  words  of  the  statute.
                 As the Grand Chamber said in that case, in  paras  139-140,
                 it has been held to include both enactments of  lower  rank
                 than statutes and unwritten law.  Furthermore,  it  implies
                 qualitative requirements, including those of  accessibility
                 and foreseeability.  Accessibility means that an individual
                 must now from the wording of the relevant provision and, if
                 need be, with the assistance of the court's  interpretation
                 of it what acts and  omissions  will  make  him  criminally
                 liable:  see also G�lmez v Turkey, Application No 26330/02,
                 20 May 2008, para 49.   The  requirement  of  forseeability
                 will be satisfied where the person  concerned  is  able  to
                 foresee, if need be  with  appropriate  legal  advice,  the
                 consequences which a given action may entail.  A law  which
                 confers a discretion is not  in  itself  inconsistent  with
                 this requirement, provided the scope of the discretion  and
                 the manner of its exercise are  indicated  with  sufficient
                 clarity  to  give   the   individual   protection   against
                 interference which is arbitrary:  Goodwin v United  Kingdom
                 (1996) EHRR 123, para 31:  Sorvisto v Finland,  Application
                 No 19348/04, 13 January 2009, para 112."

  22. Lord Hope's  approach  is  settled  law  both  at  the  level  of  the
      Strasbourg Court (see Lester, Pannick and Herberg, op cit) and also in
      our domestic courts.  The same approach was adopted by  the  House  of
      Lords in the earlier case of R (Gillan) v Commissioner for the  Police
      for the Metropolis  [2006] 2 AC 307; [2006] UKHL  12,  see  especially
      Lord Bingham of Cornhill at  [31]-[35].   At  [34],  Lord  Bingham  in
      Gillan again  emphasised  that  the  two  Convention  phrases  of  "in
      accordance with the law" and "prescribed by law" address the  legality
      of the underlying administrative or public law act:

           "34.  The lawfulness requirement  in  the  Convention  addresses
                 supremely important features  of  the  rule  of  law.   The
                 exercise of  power  by  public  officials,  as  it  affects
                 members of the  public,  must  be  governed  by  clear  and
                 publicly-accessible rules of law.  The public must  not  be
                 vulnerable to interference by public  officials  acting  on
                 any personal whim, caprice, malice, predilection or purpose
                 other than that for which the power was conferred.  This is
                 what, in this context, is meant by arbitrariness, which  is
                 the antithesis of legality.  This is  the  test  which  any
                 interference with or derogation  from  a  Convention  right
                 must meet if a violation is to be avoided."

  23. Although I was not referred to it, I see nothing in what was  said  in
      the Upper Tribunal's decision in SC (Article 8 -  in  accordance  with
      the  law)  Zimbabwe  [2012]  UKUT  00056  (IAC)  at  [10]   as   being
      inconsistent with the Strasbourg case law or its adoption by the House
      of Lords.  There, the Upper Tribunal said:

           "We recognise that there are cases where a decision to refuse an
           extension of stay or remove a person  maybe  so  contrary  to  a
           requirement contained in established policy or practice as to be
           not in accordance with the law.  In such  a  case  the  analysis
           does not move on to justification for Article 8 purposes and the
           decision must be remade in accordance with the  law,  either  by
           the Secretary of State or the Judge."

  24. No doubt, the Tribunal had in mind a situation where the decision  was
      "so contrary" to  an  established  policy  of  practice  that  it  was
      unlawful on public law grounds.  Likewise, no direct assistance can be
      gleaned from the terms of s.86(3) of the  2002  Act  which  sets  out,
      inter alia, where the Tribunal must allow an appeal when the  decision
      is "not in accordance with the law (including the Immigration Rules)".
        That Parliament had chosen to include within  the  statutory  phrase
      "not in accordance with the law" a  decision  by  a  Tribunal  on  the
      merits that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  immigration
      rule does not assist to  illuminate  the  autonomous  meaning  in  the
      European Convention which is an international treaty.

  25. The Strasbourg jurisprudence and its adoption by the  House  of  Lords
      is, in my view, conclusive of the first issue raised by  Mr  Richards.
      In this appeal, Judge Afako did not determine that the ECO's  decision
      offended the "principle of legality" summarised by Lord Hope  in  [40]
      of Purdy.    Instead, Judge Afako concluded that  the  ECO's  decision
      was, on the evidence, not correct.  On that basis, the Judge was wrong
      to conclude that decision was not in accordance with the law:  it  was
      simply a decision with which Judge Afako disagreed  on  the  evidence.
      The decision was lawful even if it was wrong. The decision had a legal
      basis in domestic law, namely the Immigration Rules; those rules  were
      sufficiently accessible; and the law  was  not  being  applied  in  an
      arbitrary way.  It cannot be said that a  decision  is  "unlawful"  or
      "illegal" or contrary to the law as used in the Convention  simply  on
      the basis that a Judge on the evidence  (which  may  include  evidence
      which was not before the original decision maker) reaches a  different
      conclusion on the factual application of the rule.  That is  precisely
      what Judge Afako did in this appeal and, in my judgment, he  erred  in
      law in finding that the ECO's decision was "not in accordance with the
      law".

  26. It is not necessary for me to go further in  this  appeal  to  explore
      precisely the scope of the "principle of legality"  enshrined  in  the
      Convention phrase "in accordance with the law".  The appellant was not
      legally represented and I did not have the benefit of contested  legal
      argument on the issue.  As a consequence, I  say  no  more  about  the
      scope of the Convention phrase than is  necessary  to  determine  this
      appeal.

  27. That does not mean, however, that in an appeal such as this one  where
      the appellant cannot directly rely on the  ground  that  the  decision
      under the Immigration Rules was not  correctly  made,  that  issue  is
      irrelevant.  It is relevant in the assessment  of  proportionality  of
      any interference with the individual's right to  respect  for  his/her
      private or family life.

  28. The Immigration  Rules  represent  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
      reflecting the public interest and the legitimate aim of "the economic
      well-being of the country" in Article 8.2 (see, eg SSHD v Huang [2007]
      UKHL 11; Odelola v SSHD [2009] UKHL 25; R(on the application of  Alvi)
      v SSHD [2012]  UKSC  33).    Any  interference  with  an  individual's
      private or family life must be "necessary  in  a  democratic  society"
      furthering one or more of the legitimate aims  set  out  in  Art  8.2.
      That is the proportionality assessment  which  entails  balancing  the
      public interest against the rights and  interests  of  the  individual
      (see R (on the application of Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL  27  at  [20]
      per Lord Bingham of Cornhill).  Whether an individual  meets  or  does
      not meet the requirements of the relevant immigration rule is relevant
      to that assessment.  Indeed, the grounds  in  this  appeal  argue,  on
      behalf of the ECO, that the Judge failed to have regard  to  the  fact
      that the appellant could not meet the requirement of  the  immigration
      rules as a "detailed expression of Government  policy  on  controlling
      immigration and protecting the public".  In effect, that concedes that
      a Judge is entitled (perhaps even required) to  determine  whether  on
      the evidence the  individual  in  fact  does  or  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of the rules even in an  appeal  where  an  appellant  is
      relying on Article 8 of the ECHR.  The fact that  an  individual  does
      meet the requirements of the Rules,  and  therefore  falls  positively
      within the "policy" of the Secretary  of  State  as  set  out  in  the
      Immigration Rules, must  be  a  significant  factor  in  balancing  an
      individual's rights and  interests  against  the  need  for  effective
      immigration control.  The need for effective immigration control  must
      necessarily be significantly diluted (if not washed away)  in  such  a
      situation.

  29. Consequently, although Judge Afako erred in law in  finding  that  the
      ECO's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  because,  on  the
      evidence, he concluded that the appellant met the requirements of para
      41, that finding was (and would be) relevant  to  the  proportionality
      assessment.  Of course,  this  can  only  arise  in  cases  where  the
      individual is able to establish that Article 8.1  is  engaged  because
      his private and family life has  been  sufficiently  interfered  with.
      Only then is it necessary to consider  whether  that  interference  is
      justified under Article 8.2.

  30. Whilst each case must dependent upon its own  circumstances,  in  non-
      family visits, it is not likely that Art 8.1 will be  engaged  on  the
      basis of 'private life' alone. Even in  'family  visits'  it  will  be
      necessary to establish  that  family  life  exists  and  the  decision
      sufficiently interferes with that family life to engage Art 8.1.

  31. In this appeal, Judge Afako found that Article  8.1  was  engaged.   I
      have already set out above  his  reasoning  in  paragraph  11  of  his
      determination (see para 8 above).  Mr Richards' second submission  was
      that the Judge had inadequately reasoned that  first,  he  had  family
      life with his daughter over the age of 18 and  that  the  decision  by
      preventing him visiting  his  daughter  was  sufficiently  serious  to
      engage Article 8.1.

  32. It is clear that family life  does  not  necessarily  conclude  simply
      because a child reaches majority (see Ghising [2012] UKUT 00161  (IAC)
      approved by the Court of Appeal in Gurung and  others  v  SSHD  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 8 at [46]).  The Judge noted that the sponsor  was  over  the
      age of 18 (in fact she before me that she was 23 when she came to  the
      UK); he noted that she was supported by the appellant and his wife and
      was their dependent.   He also noted the evidence that the conflict in
      Syria had had a psychological impact upon the appellant's daughter and
      that she needed the support through frequent visits from  the  family.
      It is clear from the evidence that the appellant has  visited  her  in
      the UK in 2010, 2011 and again in 2012 before leaving to return to his
      home country.  I see no basis upon  which  the  Judge's  finding  that
      family  life  existed  between  the  appellant  and  sponsor  can   be
      successfully challenged.  The Judge gave adequate reasons and  on  the
      evidence his conclusion was not irrational or otherwise unsustainable.



  33. Likewise, given that  the  ECO's  decision  effectively  excluded  the
      appellant from visiting his  daughter,  that  decision  did  interfere
      sufficiently with that family and private life so as to engage Article
      8.  The sponsor is based in the UK having successfully studied  for  a
      Masters degree and is currently studying for a PhD.   As  the  sponsor
      told me, she was not subject to the  same  term  structure  as  a  PhD
      student.  Although she is not settled in the UK,  her  leave  is  only
      temporary, her studies are ongoing and it would not be  reasonable  to
      expect her to engage in family life simply by leaving the UK to  visit
      her family.  The point of the evidence was that she needed the support
      of her family, from time to time, whilst she was studying in  the  UK.
      In my judgment, it was properly open to the  Judge  to  conclude  that
      Article 8 was engaged.

  34. That then leaves the issue of proportionality.  I have already set out
      the Judge's view in paragraph  20  of  his  determination  above.   He
      accepted that the refusal had a deleterious effect upon the  sponsor's
      stay and studies in the UK and that she gained support  by  visits  by
      her family.  The Judge's findings that the appellant met, in fact, the
      requirements in paragraph 41 are not challenged.  There is, therefore,
      little if any weight to be placed upon the legitimate  aim  or  public
      interest in effective immigration control.  The appellant had met  the
      requirements that define when a visitor should be allowed  entry  into
      the UK.  He is a genuine visitor who will leave  at  the  end  of  his
      visit which he intends to make in order to support his daughter who is
      lawfully undertaking higher education studies in the  UK.   Given  the
      circumstances  of  the  sponsor  and  appellant,  there   is   nothing
      unreasonable in the appellant wishing to visit his daughter in the  UK
      rather than the reverse.

  35.  Balancing  the  public  interest  (such  that  it  is)  against   the
      interference with the appellant's (and his daughter's) family life  by
      the refusal of entry clearance,  I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  the
      decision is not proportionate.  The ECO has failed  to  make  out  the
      justification in Article 8.2.

  36. Thus, albeit for somewhat different reasons from those of Judge Afako,
      I am satisfied that the  appellant  has  established  that  the  ECO's
      decision breaches Article 8.

Decision

  37. The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  allowing  the  appellant's
      appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.   That decision is set aside and I
      remake the decision allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8  for  the
      reasons I have given.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
