
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/07045/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 9 February 2016                     |                On 22 February 2016   |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS SHAMIM AKHTAR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, instructed by Malik Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio dated 4 September  2015  allowing  an
    appeal brought by Mrs Shamim Akhtar against  a  decision  of  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 15 October 2014 refusing her entry clearance to
    the United Kingdom as a visitor.  In this decision I shall refer to the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, that is  that  Mrs
    Akhtar is  the  Appellant  and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is  the
    Respondent.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  who  was  born  on  1  January
    1948.  She was 66 years old at the  date  of  the  decision.   She  has
    children resident in the United Kingdom, particularly her adult son, Mr
    Zaeem Baig.  He is settled and is a British national.  He has  children
    aged 11, being a son, and twins, a  boy  and  a  girl,  aged  15.   The
    Appellant had twice previously successfully applied for entry clearance
    to visit the United Kingdom and had  visited  the  country  between  24
    February 2007 and 13 May 2007 and again on 13 November  2008  until  21
    December 2008.  Mr Baig had also visited  the  Appellant  in  Pakistan,
    most recently I believe in 2013.   The  Appellant  lives  with  another
    adult daughter in Pakistan.

3.   In her application for entry clearance  the  Appellant  said  that  she
    wished to visit Mr Zaeem Baig and his  family.   That  application  was
    refused on the grounds that the Entry Clearance Officer  believed  that
    she had not demonstrated that she  was  financially  supported  as  she
    claimed.  She had not demonstrated  that  she  was  residing  with  any
    family members in Pakistan or demonstrated the level of her  own  funds
    or her financial circumstances.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied  as  to  her  circumstances  in  Pakistan  or  that  she  had
    demonstrated that there would be adequate accommodation provided to her
    on arrival in the United Kingdom.  The application was refused  on  the
    basis that she was not a  genuine  visitor  and  did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of Immigration Rule 41.

4.   An appeal lies against such decision now only on limited grounds  which
    include human rights grounds.  The Appellant brought  such  an  appeal,
    that appeal being heard before the judge at Hatton Cross on  18  August
    2015.  The Sponsor gave  evidence  at  the  hearing.   The  judge  made
    certain findings of fact which included at paragraph 7 in the light  of
    all the evidence the judge had heard that the Appellant was  a  genuine
    visitor and did satisfy all of the relevant requirements to Rule 41  of
    the Immigration Rules.   The judge was conscious of the  fact  that  it
    was necessary for the Appellant to  establish  that  Article  8(1)  was
    engaged in such an appeal in order for the appeal  to  have  any  merit
    irrespective of the fact that she met the requirements of paragraph 41.



5.   In considering the Appellant's family ties with the United Kingdom  the
    judge held as follows:

         "6.  Applying the decision of the Upper Tribunal I have  considered
             the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  I have considered  whether
             the refusal of entry clearance affects the family life of  the
             Appellant and the Sponsor.  Although the Appellant  is  living
             in  Pakistan  the  fact  remains  that  she  has  always  been
             receiving financial support from her son in the UK the Sponsor
             since her husband died.  The Appellant has shown  me  evidence
             which goes back before the date of decision.  Although this is
             evidence which had been submitted after the date  of  decision
             it is appertaining to the date of decision as the Sponsor  has
             always stated that he has  supported  his  mother.   There  is
             therefore the element of financial dependency on  the  Sponsor
             in the UK and that creates a family life also.   I  also  note
             that the Appellant was visited by the Sponsor and  his  family
             in 2013.  The Appellant did not make  it  clear  in  her  Visa
             Application Form that she is supported by friends  and  family
             and that would definitely include the Sponsor in this case.  I
             therefore find that there is a dependency in the  relationship
             between the Appellant and the Sponsor.  The Appellant has also
             visited the UK in 2007 and 2008 and the  Sponsor  has  visited
             the Appellant with his family in 2013."


6.   I also find it necessary to refer to a passage at paragraph  9  of  the
    judge's decision as follows:

         "9.  Having found that the Appellant has not  failed  to  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration  Rules  at  the  time  of  the
             decision I now consider whether the Respondent's decision is a
             proportionate one.  The Appellant is 67 years old and she  has
             a son who has been supporting her for a long period  of  time.
             He is self-employed and he is only able to spend a maximum  of
             thirteen days with his  mother  whereas  his  mother  who  was
             retired is in a position to spend more time with him  and  her
             grandchildren in the United Kingdom.  Bearing in mind the very
             good immigration history of the Appellant the fact that  there
             is a very good bond and relationship between the Appellant and
             the Sponsor as well  as  her  grandchildren.   Maintenance  of
             effective  immigration  control  is  in  the  public  interest
             according to Section 117B(1) of the Immigration Act 2014.  The
             Appellant satisfies all of the requirements of paragraph 41 of
             the Rules and has a good history of compliance  of  coming  to
             the UK.  Her history  of  compliance  and  her  strong  family
             relationship with her grandchildren and son and  her  age  and
             the desire of the Sponsor to spend more quality time with  his
             mother which he is unable to do  due  to  his  self-employment
             makes    the    Respondent's    decision    in    this    case
             disproportionate."

    The appeal was thus allowed.

5.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  in
    grounds dated 16 September 2015 arguing that  the  judge  undertakes  a
    proportionality assessment at paragraph 6 but fails to make a  reasoned
    finding in relation  to  family  life.   Whilst  the  Sponsor  provides
    financial support it is submitted that this in itself is not sufficient
    to demonstrate that the relationship goes beyond the  normal  emotional
    ties between a parent and adult child.  It was  also  argued  that  the
    judge's assessment of proportionality was inadequate.   The  Respondent
    then puts forward various alternate methods that family life  could  be
    enjoyed as between the  parties  to  this  relationship,  such  as  the
    Sponsor taking family holidays in Pakistan and communicating  with  the
    Appellant by modern means of communication.  It was  suggested  that  a
    visit by the Appellant to the Sponsor is not the only  option  open  to
    them.  It was then argued that the judge's  proportionality  assessment
    did not explain why the refusal of a visa which only allows the parties
    to be together temporarily was  a  disproportionate  interference  with
    Article 8 rights.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on this ground by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Colyer on 7 January 2016.

7.   I have heard from  the  Respondent  in  support  of  those  grounds  of
    appeal.  It seems to me that the principal argument being  advanced  by
    the Respondent is that Article 8(1) was not engaged in this matter and,
    referring to the grounds of  appeal,  the  judge  had  concentrated  on
    issues of financial support and that such support was not sufficient to
    demonstrate a relationship engaging Article 8.  I find that that ground
    is not made out.  I have quoted above the deliberations of the judge as
    between the family life enjoyed between the Appellant  and  her  family
    members in the United Kingdom.  It is true  that  at  paragraph  6  the
    judge examined the financial dependency of the Appellant on the Sponsor
    in the United Kingdom.  However it is also recorded  that  they  had  a
    record of visiting one another and it was recorded at paragraph 9  that
    the Appellant has a very good bond and relationship between herself and
    the Sponsor, her son, as well as the grandchildren.  This  relationship
    was described as a strong family relationship  with  her  grandchildren
    and son.

8.   I find that the challenge brought by the Respondent is essentially  one
    of perversity.  The judge heard evidence from  the  Sponsor  about  his
    relationship with his mother and his mother's relationship with his own
    children and the judge made findings of fact as I have set  out  as  to
    that  relationship.   It  is  clear  that  the  judge  held  that  that
    relationship constituted family life.  If the Respondent's challenge is
    that there was no evidential foundation for such a finding I find  that
    that criticism is not made out.

9.   I find that  the  remainder  of  the  Respondent's  criticisms  of  the
    judge's decision  are  just  that;  criticisms,  amounting  to  a  mere
    disagreement.  It seems to me that when applying the  guidance  of  the
    President in the case of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 112 (IAC) that in the case of appeals brought against  refusal  of
    entry clearance under Article 8 ECHR the claimant's ability to  satisfy
    the Immigration Rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
    Tribunal but is capable of being a  weighty  though  not  determinative
    factor when deciding whether  such  refusal  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of enforcing  immigration  control.   The  President  in
    other passages of Mostafa also pointed out that the purpose of Rule  41
    was to facilitate family visits.  It is clear in the present case  that
    the judge held that the Appellant was a genuine visitor  and  that  she
    met  all  of  the  relevant  considerations  in  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He also held, sustainably, I find, that  there  was
    family life as between the Appellant and  her  family  members  in  the
    United Kingdom.

10.  There remains then, I find, no coherent  proposition  advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State as to why entry clearance ought not to be granted to
    the Appellant.  The suggestions that family life could continue by  the
    Sponsor visiting the Appellant in Pakistan or that  family  life  might
    continue  by  the  use  of  modern  means  of  communication  fails  to
    acknowledge the recognition given by  the  President  in  the  case  of
    Mostafa to the importance of family visits.  There seems to me to be no
    reason in logic or on policy grounds, once  Article  8(1)  is  engaged,
    upon the judge being satisfied that the requirements  of  Rule  41  are
    met, and in circumstances where the refusal of entry clearance  amounts
    to an interference with the family life enjoyed between the  Appellant,
    the sponsor, and his family, for this Appellant  to  be  refused  entry
    clearance.   I find that the Respondent's grounds identify no  material
    error of law in the  judge's  decision.   I  dismiss  the  Respondent's
    appeal and I uphold the decision of Judge Adio.

    Notice of Decision

     The making of the First tier Tribunal's decision did  not  involve  the
    making of any error of law.

     I dismiss the appeal brought by the Secretary of State.

     I uphold the decision of the First tier Tribunal


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                             Date: 17.2.16

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




