
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/07699/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 8 January 2016                        |              On 20 January 2016     |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                SAEEDA NASIR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bajwa of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She was born on 3  June  1955.
    She appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse her  leave  to
    enter as a family visitor dated 3 November 2014.   The  respondent  was
    not satisfied the appellant's circumstances were as she claimed or that
    she was genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a limited period.  The
    Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied  the  appellant  intended  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

 2. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hillis, in a decision  promulgated  on
    29 July 2015, dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds,
    because he found that as the appellant's brother, whom she intended  to
    visit passed away on 5 November 2014, the appellant had no family  life
    with him.

 3. The grounds, claimed the oral hearing was a nullity, that the  findings
    made by the judge were incorrect and that the applicable  law  assisted
    the appellant.  She claimed that she satisfied  the  Immigration  Rules
    such that refusal to grant her a visa would be a disproportionate  lack
    of respect to her private life.  She called for the judge's decision to
    be set aside.  Whilst she acknowledged that the Sponsor had  died,  she
    said she had another brother in the United Kingdom.

 4. Judge Page granted permission to appeal.  He said as follows:

         "The judge correctly observed that as this was  not  an  in-country
         appeal, the judge could only take into account facts up to the date
         of the decision, namely 3 November  2014.   The  appellant  claimed
         that the respondent's decision was in breach of her protected right
         under Article 8 to family life with her brother by  reason  of  the
         respondent's refusal to grant her leave to enter the UK ......  had
         prevented her visiting her brother who was terminally ill.  At  the
         hearing the respondent had relied on the contents  of  the  refusal
         letter dated 3 November 2014.  In dismissing the appeal  the  judge
         noted that the appellant's brother had passed away  on  5  November
         2014 as shown on his death certificate dated 7 November  2014.   At
         paragraph 16 of the decision the judge said:  'As  the  appellant's
         sponsor has now passed away there could be no family  life  between
         him and the appellant within the terms of Article 8 of  the  ECHR.'
         Consequently the judge found there was no  family  life  to  engage
         Article  8  in  this  appellant's  appeal.   In   the   appellant's
         application  for  permission  to  appeal  she  makes  reference  to
         paragraph 16 of the judge's decision and  asked  that  the  judge's
         decision is reviewed.  The appellant is not represented so  I  have
         taken a purposive  approach  to  this  appeal.   There  is  what  I
         consider to be an obvious error of  law  in  the  judge's  decision
         because the judge acknowledged that he had to consider the evidence
         as at the date of the decision to refuse and as at the date of  the
         decision to refuse the appellant's brother was seriously  ill.   It
         could not have been known by the Entry Clearance Officer  that  the
         appellant's brother was to die  within  days  of  the  decision  to
         refuse.  The judge in dismissing the appeal said that there was  no
         family life between the  appellant  and  her  brother  because  her
         brother had died.  If he had died before the  decision  that  would
         have been a different matter.  The facts is  that  the  appellant's
         brother died after the decision under appeal so this  required  the
         judge to decide the appeal on the  facts  extant  at  the  time  of
         decision when the appellant's brother was alive.  I have considered
         whether this was a material error given that  the  appellant  would
         not be granted entry clearance now to visit her brother, given  the
         change of circumstances.  It is material  in  the  sense  that  the
         appellant may wish to make a further application  for  a  visitor's
         visa and if this decision stands it would appear on her record  may
         cause her to be treated unfairly in the  future.   As  there  is  a
         material error in the judge's  decision  permission  to  appeal  is
         granted."

 5. The respondent served a Rule 24 response on 17 November  2015  claiming
    that the judge directed himself appropriately.  The judge had  said  at
    [17] that no adverse credibility findings had  been  made  against  the
    appellant.  It was open to the appellant to make a fresh application if
    she wished to visit another family member.  The judge  was  correct  in
    taking into account that the appellant's brother had  passed  away  and
    had made a finding that there was no family life at  the  date  of  the
    decision and no evidence of dependency or a relationship beyond  normal
    family life.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Mr Bajwa relied upon the grounds. The judge was obliged to consider the
    circumstances as of the date of the decision and ignore the  fact  that
    the sponsor had died.

 7. Mr Nath relied upon the Rule 24 response.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. The appellant was not represented at the hearing. The judge  took  into
    account the documentary evidence provided. Judge Page  dealt  with  the
    permission to appeal application. It was not  open  to  Judge  Page  to
    conclude as he did that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision; that was for  me  to  decide  at  the  error  of  law
    hearing.

 9. The appellant had applied to visit  the  sponsor  who  sadly  had  died
    between the date of the respondent's  decision  and  the  hearing.  The
    judge found that due to the change of circumstances, the appeal had  to
    be dismissed because the family life relied upon  had  ended  with  the
    sponsor's death.

10. It might appear obvious that given the sponsor's death, the judge would
    have had to dismiss the appeal, but it was argued in the  grounds  that
    the appellant had another brother here who she had wanted to  visit  in
    lieu of the deceased and  in  any  event,  the  judge  was  obliged  to
    consider the circumstances under Article  8  as  of  the  date  of  the
    decision, given the appellant was out of country.

11. I find in a technical sense, because the appellant was out of  country,
    the judge was obliged to consider  the  circumstances  with  regard  to
    Article 8 as of the date of the decision. The judge was aware  of  that
    issue which he referred to at [8] of his decision. I therefore find the
    judge erred in taking  into  account  the  change  in  the  appellant's
    circumstances due to the death of the sponsor.

12. I next consider in terms  of  a  common  sense  approach,  whether  the
    judge's error was material. There could have been no family life as  of
    the date of the hearing because the sponsor was deceased. The judge did
    not engage with the reasons for refusal but dismissed the appeal solely
    because of the change of  circumstances,  stressing  that  he  was  not
    making any adverse credibility findings.

13. I find given the change of circumstances that the judge's error was not
    material. The fundamental nature of the appeal had changed between  the
    decision and the hearing. The purpose of the  visit  in  terms  of  the
    application was to stay with the sponsor. The appellant might well have
    had other relatives in the United Kingdom but her relationship(s)  with
    those persons was not  the  basis  of  her  application  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer. Whilst  in  a  technical  sense  the  judge  had  to
    consider the circumstances as of the date of the respondent's decision,
    he did not err materially in taking  the  death  of  the  sponsor  into
    account, notwithstanding that the death occurred subsequent to the date
    of the decision.

14. In summary, I conclude that the decision does not  contain  a  material
    error of law, such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should
    be set aside.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.


No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date   8 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart




