
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/09160/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st July 2014                                |On 9th July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               Mrs grace asare
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Legal Representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herlihy promulgated on 8th April 2014, following a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 26th March 2014.  In the determination,  the  judge  dismissed
    the appeal of Mrs Grace Asare.  The Appellant subsequently applied for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 11th November 1948.
     She appeals against the refusal of entry clearance to visit  her  son,
    Mr Alfred A Opoku, present and settled in the UK, under paragraph 41 of
    HC 395.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge's findings are confused and confusing.  What appears to  have
    happened is that the facts of this case have been conflicted  with  the
    facts of another visitor's appeal (which was presumably before the same
    judge on the same day) and which have led to  findings  of  fact  which
    bear no relationship to what actually transpired on the day in question
    before the judge.  Thus, whereas this appeal is that of the  mother  of
    Mr Alfred Opuku, and the judge appears to that  extent  to  be  correct
    when referring to the facts here  at  paragraph  5.1,  thereafter,  the
    judge focuses on a "wife" and "her child" which bears  no  relationship
    to the facts here.  This is cleared at paragraph 5.2  where  the  judge
    begins by stating, "The Sponsor was asked if he intended for  his  wife
    to live with him permanently in the United Kingdom ...".   It  is  also
    clear at paragraph 6.3 where the judge states that,  "The  Respondent's
    representative asked if it was the Appellant's intention to  leave  her
    child in the United Kingdom when  she  returned  to  Ghana  ...".   The
    confusion continues at paragraph 6.4 where the judge records, "He  said
    that his wife has a better life in Ghana where she is actively involved
    in women's rights and in encouraging girls to go to school".   None  of
    this relates to the facts here.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that the reasons given by the judge at
    paragraph 5.2 to 7.3 "Have nothing to do with  what  was  discussed  on
    26th March 2014".

 5. On 8th May 2014, permission to appeal was granted on  this  basis.   On
    5th June 2014, a clear and proper Rule 24 response  was  given  by  the
    Respondent  Secretary  of  State.   This  makes  it  clear  that,  "The
    Respondent is entirely in  agreement  with  the  permission"  and  that
    "Under the circumstances it is suggested that the error in  law  matter
    to be decided on the papers and the appeal remitted back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing".

 6. Despite this very helpful Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State,
    the matter has nonetheless ended up in  an  oral  hearing  before  this
    Tribunal, for no particular good reason.

Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me, Mr Nigel Bramble, appearing on behalf of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, simply repeated what  was  said  in  the
    Rule 24 response.  Mr Alfred Opuku  was  in  attendance  and  expressed
    frustration at having to return back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    this hearing.  However, it seems to me that this  is  the  only  proper
    course of action in that the Appellant has been deprived of  a  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal in accordance  with  Practice  Statement
    7.2.

Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside this decision for the reasons that I
    have given above.

Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  In accordance with paragraph 7.2 of  the  Practice
    Statement, I direct that this matter  be  returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard again by a judge other than  Judge  Herlihy  on  a
    completely de novo basis.

10. No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th July 2014


