
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/10516/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 19 June 2013                                 |Promulgated                |
|                                                |On 1 July 2013             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                            javid vali umari gen
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India who applied for entry clearance  as
    a visitor under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  His application
    was refused in circumstances which I will deal with in  greater  detail
    later on.  One of the bases upon  which  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    relied was in relation to whether or not this was  a  family  visit  as
    defined by the Immigration  Rules.   That  I  think  was  not  in  fact
    material for the purposes  of  the  substantive  consideration  of  the
    application.  However it was of some importance when if it came to  the
    ongoing right of appeal to the Tribunal.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer
    decided:

         "You seek entry to the UK to visit your uncle.   However  you  have
         not submitted any evidence to show you are related  as  claimed  to
         your sponsor or that you have  ever  even  met.  Instead  you  have
         submitted a copy of a British passport and stated that  the  holder
         is your uncle, without substantiating this.   I  am  therefore  not
         satisfied that this  application  constitutes  a  family  visit  as
         defined by the Immigration Rules.  If you wish  to  appeal  against
         this decision, you  should  submit  original  documentary  evidence
         demonstrating the stated relationship."

    The decision went on:

         "Your right of appeal

             'You are  entitled  to  appeal  against  this  decision  under
             Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
             2002.  If you wish to appeal you must  complete  the  attached
             IAFT-2 Notice of Appeal form.  An information sheet  has  also
             been provided.  If you decide to appeal against  this  refusal
             of this application the decision will be  reviewed  with  your
             grounds of appeal and the supporting documents you provide'."

 2. The decision was made on 6 February 2012  and  it  was  in  due  course
    reviewed by the Entry Clearance Manager who made a  decision  accepting
    the decision of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Manager's decision was made on 9 July 2012.

 3. The appeal, if it was an appeal, came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hindson  whose  determination  was  promulgated  on  6  November  2012.
    Unsurprisingly, the case was considered on the papers at  Bradford.   I
    say it was unsurprising.  It was as a result of the  invitation  to  do
    that but  in  any  event  neither  the  appellant  nor  the  respondent
    attended.  The appellant of course could  not  attend  himself  but  it
    would have been open to him to have  had  an  oral  hearing  where  the
    sponsor or other family members had come to provide evidence.   However
    the Immigration Judge did not determine the appeal, rather he  provided
    a ruling on what he considered to be a preliminary issue and the ruling
    dealt  with  the  familial  relationship  and  he  concluded  that  the
    appellant had  failed  to  adduce  evidence  as  to  that  relationship
    notwithstanding the fact it was his claim that his uncle,  the  brother
    of his father and  the  appellant  also  has  siblings  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge therefore concluded:

         "Notwithstanding that this point was made by the ECO in the refusal
         letter  the  appellant  has  provided  no   further   evidence   of
         relationship.  He has simply reiterated his claim in the grounds of
         appeal.  Further, he is electing to have his appeal  determined  on
         the papers means I have not had the benefit of the  oral  testimony
         of the sponsor.  I am surprised that he would  chose  to  have  the
         appeal determined on the  papers  in  these  circumstances.   I  am
         therefore not satisfied that the appellant is related as claimed to
         those he says he intends to visit."

 4. In the granting  of  permission  to  appeal,  Designated  Judge  Zucker
    considered that it was arguable that the judge was wrong  in  making  a
    ruling as he did and that he should have  determined  the  appeal.   In
    reaching that conclusion he referred to the  guidance  offered  in  the
    case of SB (family visit appeal: brother-in-law?) Pakistan [2008] UKIAT
    00053.  In SB (family visit appeal) the Tribunal reached the conclusion
    that when there was a valid appeal before the Tribunal it was not  good
    enough to say that there was no appeal.  Instead, a valid appeal had to
    be disposed of in accordance with the  statutory  provisions  governing
    such appeals and that required a decision to be made either allowing or
    dismissing the appeal.  Consequently it deprecated the disposal  of  an
    appeal  by  ruling  to  the  effect  that  there  was  none.   In   the
    circumstances of this case I am  quite  satisfied  that  there  was  an
    appeal and indeed that was what the Entry Clearance Officer said  there
    was when he made his  decision  and  indeed  the  form  that  had  been
    provided to the appellant in which to complete his  grounds  of  appeal
    had been provided by the Entry Clearance  Officer  himself.   In  those
    circumstances it would be slightly curious to say the least  if  it  is
    subsequently found that there was no appeal.  However, that is  perhaps
    a matter of little moment in the context of this appeal.

 5. The substance of the decision that was  made  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was the application of paragraph  320(7B)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Where paragraph 320(7B) applies there is an  automatic  refusal
    for a period of up to ten years, a period which commences from the date
    of the previous event in which the deception or submission of falsified
    documents or information was employed.  The scheme of the Rules is that
    where an  application  for  entry  clearance  has  been  refused  under
    paragraph 320(7A),  namely  on  the  basis  that  there  has  been  the
    submission of false documents or false information, the application has
    to be refused where a decision has been previously made under paragraph
    320(7A), then  any  subsequent  application  has  automatically  to  be
    refused under paragraph 320(7B).  In this case there was  an  automatic
    application of paragraph 320(7B) because  there  had  been  an  earlier
    refusal in 2011 on the basis of  the  submission  of  a  false  English
    examination certificate.  We know that  there  was  such  a  submission
    because Mr Watson, the Entry Clearance Manager, provided evidence  that
    the appellant had been invited to interview in relation to that earlier
    application and during the interview he had admitted that an agent  had
    given him the English language certificate which was one he knew to  be
    false.  Accordingly, there can be no answer save that  the  application
    fell to  be  dismissed  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager and then any subsequent appeal had  to  be  dismissed
    for similar reasons.  It follows that the grant of leave in  this  case
    served no useful purpose whatever.

 6. However, there is an issue as to whether or  not  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer acted reasonably in requiring  the  material  that  he  did  in
    relation to the family relationship.  It seems to me that a  degree  of
    caution has to be exercised in  cases  of  this  type  when  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer is requiring an applicant to satisfy the requirements
    of the Rules as to a family relationship.  The reason for doing this is
    that it seems to me it will be disproportionate to require an applicant
    to prove  the  family  relationship  by,  for  example,  obtaining  DNA
    evidence but the requirement  for  information  will  depend  upon  the
    circumstances of a case.  In this  case,  because  of  the  documentary
    deception that had earlier been used, it seems to me it was  reasonable
    for the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  make  a  requirement  that  the
    applicant would supply some form of documentary evidence  to  establish
    the relationship.  In this  case  the  applicant  himself  submitted  a
    British passport but that did not indicate a British passport which  he
    claimed was that of his uncle but the Entry Clearance Officer said that
    that was not sufficient to show the relationship between  the  passport
    holder and the applicant.  That was something that the applicant  could
    have made good in the review by the Entry Clearance  Manager.   It  was
    also something that the applicant could have made good  in  his  appeal
    before the Tribunal.  Accordingly, there was  an  opportunity  for  the
    applicant to provide additional information that would  have  supported
    that relationship.  He did not do so and consequently it  was  open  to
    the judge to conclude that the applicant had failed to  establish  that
    he was related to the uncle as he claimed.  It would have been open  to
    him to have called the sponsor or his siblings to establish that  point
    and he did not do so.  In those circumstances the appropriate  decision
    is that the appellant has failed to establish the familial relationship
    between himself and the UK sponsor and accordingly there is  a  finding
    that the 2003 Family Regulations do not provide a right  of  appeal  to
    the Tribunal.  Furthermore, and in the alternative, were he to  have  a
    right of appeal that right of appeal is bound to fail because  it  fell
    to be refused under the automatic provisions of  paragraph  320(7B)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 7. I  accordingly  find  there  was  no  material  error  in  the  judge's
    determination.








                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

