
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/12552/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2014                          |On 2 October 2014            |
|(extempore judgment)                          |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER



                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  aisha abelhalim hassan abelhalim elbakry

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:     Mr T Chodha, counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  who  has  been  given
    permission to appeal  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
    allowed an appeal on human rights grounds  and  under  the  Immigration
    Rules against a decision by  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer refused Miss Elbakry entry clearance as a visitor  on
    17 June 2013.

2.   The core of the refusal was that Miss Elbakry had stated that  she  was
    single and unemployed, had no income, had provided  evidence  that  she
    had graduated from the university in  July  2012  and  aside  from  her
    graduation certificate the Entry Clearance Officer had seen no evidence
    of her personal and financial  circumstances  in  Egypt.   He  was  not
    satisfied that she had demonstrated  any  ties  that  would  merit  her
    return to Egypt and this gave him cause to doubt her intentions.  Given
    that, he was not satisfied that her intentions were as she  had  stated
    or that she intended to leave the UK on the completion of her  proposed
    three week visit.

3.   The judge allowed the appeal both under the Rules and under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.  There is no  appeal  right
    under the Rules for visit visa  entry  clearance  refusals.  The  judge
    erred in law in his finding under the Rules.

4.   The judge said in paragraph 27 of the decision  "I  am  persuaded  that
    the appellant merits the benefit of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  as
    amended as well as the provisions of the ECHR."

5.   The judge has made  no  findings  in  his  determination  on  the  core
    elements upon which the entry clearance was refused.  He sets  out  the
    evidence of Dr Dabash who was clearly, both from that evidence and from
    the documents that he submitted, an honourable person  and  whose  word
    could be taken as legitimate and truthful.

6.   Unfortunately that is not enough in an appeal of  this  nature.   As  I
    have said, there is no appeal under the Rules.  The  claimant  appealed
    on human rights grounds.  The judge considered Article 8 and  purported
    to consider it in terms for the five step test set out in the  case  of
    Razgar.  In paragraph 21 of the decision the judge he  says:  "Applying
    the Razgar test, one cannot escape the conclusion that the[claimant] is
    in a familial relationship."

7.   That is not sufficient.  The fact  that  the  claimant  is  related  by
    blood to her uncle and that  her  uncle  is  providing  full  financial
    support for this visit and that  he  has  also  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge provided her  with  money
    as and when she requires it, does not result in a  familial  dependency
    such as is required to enable Article  8  to  be  engaged.   There  was
    simply inadequate evidence before the Entry Clearance  Officer  or  the
    First-tier Tribunal to say that there was a  Kugathas  type  dependency
    between Dr Dabash and his niece.

8.   Much as it appears that this young woman should be able  to  visit  her
    family here in the UK, there is no expectation of that.   There  is  no
    right to do that.  She has to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  or
    there has to be a breach of her human rights to prevent that.   Article
    8 is not engaged on the basis of the evidence that was before the Entry
    Clearance  Officer.   The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowing the appeal under the provisions of Article 8 is  an  error  of
    law.  He has  simply  misinterpreted  what  is  meant,  quite  possibly
    because of a general sympathy with this young woman.

9.   Unfortunately, although urged by Mr Chodha to be bold, I cannot  ignore
    the law and the law as it stands at the moment is  that  Article  8  is
    only engaged if there is a Kugathas type dependency  between  an  adult
    and her sponsor.  That simply does not exist on the evidence before the
    Entry Clearance Officer or the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  am  therefore
    satisfied that there is an error of law in the determination  of  Judge
    Majid who allowed the appeal. I  set  aside  the  determination  to  be
    remade.

10.  There was some discussing before  me  as  to  whether  this  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for it to  be  made  again  but  Mr
    Chodha very properly agreed that in terms of the appeal if  it  did  go
    back in front of the First-tier Tribunal, the Tribunal  would  have  to
    look at the evidence as it was  before  ECO,  albeit  as  amplified  by
    evidence that appertained to that decision.

11. The evidence is that there is no Kugathas type dependency  and  as  such
   Article 8 is not engaged to the extent that the decision is  unreasonable
   or a breach of Article 8.  Accordingly I dismiss the appeal.


12. This does not of course mean that the Ms  Elbakry  cannot  apply  again.
   Each application is dealt with by an Entry Clearance Officer on the basis
   of the information provided and, given the positive findings in  relation
   to Dr Dabash in the First-tier Tribunal which are not challenged  by  the
   Secretary of State, then there is every prospect that an  application  by
   Ms  Elbakry  for  entry  clearance  in  the  future  will  be  considered
   independently by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  the  basis  of  the
   information available at that time when a new application is put in.





Signed                                  Date 1st October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

