
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/12262/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2014                                |On 15th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         CHANDRAKANT MANILAL CHAUHAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent, whom I shall refer to as the appellant  as  he  was  in
    the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal, is a citizen  of  India
    and his date of birth is 5 August 1977.   He  made  an  application  to
    visit the UK in order to visit is aunt who was not in good health.  His
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer in Mumbai on  20
    June 2013.

2.   The appellant indicated that he intended  to  stay  in  the  UK  for  a
    period of two months. He works in India as  a  carpenter.  His  cousin,
    Naina Chauhan,  would  sponsor  him.   She  intended  to  maintain  and
    accommodate him during his visit.  With the appellant's application  he
    submitted, amongst other documents, a letter dated 2 April  2013,  from
    the  hospital,  indicating  that   his   aunt   had   "advanced   renal
    insufficiency".

3.   The application was refused by the  ECO  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    (paragraph 41(i), (ii), (iii) and (vi)). The appellant appealed and his
    appeal was allowed under article 8 by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Trevaskis. The Judge  made  the  following  findings  at  [10]  of  the
    determination:

         "I am satisfied that to the extent that the  appellant  may,  as  a
         foreign national resident  outside the European Economic  Area,  be
         entitled to the protection of Article 8.  The respondent's decision
         is an interference with the family  life  that  the  appellant  may
         share with her relatives in the United Kingdom;  I  find  that  the
         appellant is a member of a large and  close-knit  family,  and  has
         many relatives in the United Kingdom; his cousin  and  her  husband
         are well established members of the community who are  willing  and
         able to host him for his visit; it is important  that  his  elderly
         relatives  are  able  to  be  visited  by  their  family   members,
         particularly if they are near; the end of their lives; I find  that
         the refusal of the appellant's application  is  a  disproportionate
         interference with the appellant's right enjoy family life, and will
         have  a  significant  impact  on  other  members  of  his   family,
         particularly his aunt.  I hope that his visit  will  be  able  take
         place while she is still able to benefit from it."

4.   The appeal was allowed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Trevaskis
    having determined the matter on the  papers  on  11  November  2014  in
    accordance with the appellant's wishes. There was no  statutory  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules, but the grounds of appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal raised article 8 of the 1950 Convention on Human  Rights.
    Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Molloy in a decision of 22 May 2014.   Thus the
    matter came before me.

5.   Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge there was  an  appellant's  bundle
    which included amongst other documents a letter from the sponsor, Naina
    Chauhan, of 15 July 2013.  Her evidence was that it was  the  right  of
    her elderly parents and her aunt to see their nephew, the appellant, at
    the end of their lives.  The appellant is self-employed  and  he  earns
    12,000 rupees per month. He receives this in  cash  and  the  money  is
    spent on a day-to-day basis.  His income is below the  reporting  limit
    for Indian tax purposes.  The  appellant  has  assets  in  India.   The
    sponsor is a deputy head of a primary  school  and  her  husband  is  a
    chartered tax advisor.  The appellant wishes to pay his respects to his
    elderly aunt.  The sponsor's parents in the UK supported the  appellant
    until he became independent. There are close family bonds  between  the
    appellant and his relatives in the UK.  The sponsor's  father  built  a
    house for the appellant's family in India.


The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions


6.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that there is no  family
    life in the sense of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  There  is  no
    evidence that an inability to visit would have a significant impact  on
    other family members as found by the  Judge.  There  were  no  findings
    under the Immigration Rules and the decision was not in accordance with
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC).

7.   Mr Bramble made oral submissions  in  the  context  of  the  permission
    application.  The sponsor did not attend the hearing before me and  the
    appellant was not legally represented.  The appellant faxed submissions
    to the Tribunal and I have considered these. The thrust of  them  being
    that the Judge did not make an error of law.  I noted  that  there  had
    been  an application to adjourn today's hearing made by  the  appellant
    which had been refused by another Judge and this  application  was  not
    renewed before me.


Conclusions

8.   In my view the Judge erred in  law  for  the  reasons  outimed  in  the
    grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  He  misdirected  himself  in
    relation to article 8. The error  is  material  and  I  set  aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and I remake  the  decision  pursuant  to  Section
    12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.   There
    is no statutory appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The Judge accepted
    the evidence of the sponsor contained in the letter of 15 July 2014 and
    there is no reason for me to go behind the positive  findings  that  he
    made. These are not challenged in any event by the Secretary of State.

9.   The Judge should have gone on to consider whether  there  are  arguably
    good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules
    in accordance with Gulshan.   The appellant wanted to  visit  his  aunt
    and uncle in the UK. It is the case that the family are  close  and  at
    some stage the appellant's uncle here in the UK has  taken  a  paternal
    role towards him.  However, the appellant is an adult and the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal and before me does  not  establish  that
    there are arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules on the basis of the appellant wishes to visit his
    elderly relatives here.

10.  However, if I am wrong about that it would not be material  because  in
    order to engage Article 8(1) I would have to consider whether there  is
    a family life which would engage the 1951 Convention on  Human  Rights.
    The fact is that  the  appeal  concerns  the  relationship  between  an
    applicant and his aunt and uncle.  It is a relationship between adults.



11.  In Kugathas v SSHD  [2004] EWCA Civ 31 which was a case that  concerned
    an adult's relationship with his mother and adult siblings the Court of
    Appeal thought that the following passage in S v United Kingdom  [1984]
    40 DR196 was still relevant.

         "Generally the protection of family life under Article  8  involves
         cohabiting dependants such as parents  and  their  dependent  minor
         children. Whether it extends to other relationships depends on  the
         circumstances of the particular case. Relationships between  adults
         ... would not necessarily acquire the protection of  Article  8  of
         the Convention without evidence of further elements  of  dependency
         involving more than the normal emotional ties."

12.  The evidence of the sponsor was accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but it does not establish that there are further elements of dependency
    involving more than the normal emotional ties.  There  is  no  evidence
    relating to how often the appellant  sees  his  relatives  in  the  UK.
    There was no evidence of the quality of the relationships at  the  date
    of the decision.  In this case article 8(1) is not engaged.

13.  The  appeal  should  be  dismissed  accordingly.   The  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is  allowed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  is  set  aside.   I  remake  the  decision  and  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 of  the  1950  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.





Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 15 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


