
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/12255/2013
                                                               VA/12257/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2015                   |On 11th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                enver bakalli
                              dilfiqar bakalli
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by EU Migration
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Enver Bakalli and  Dilfiqar  Bakalli  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell who in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 1st December 2014 dismissed  their  appeals  against
    the refusal of visit visas by the ECO in Tirana.  The applications  had
    been made before the new rules limiting right of appeal came into force
    and accordingly they had a full right of appeal on both applications in
    respect of the application of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. One basis for the refusal of their applications was that dishonesty had
    been  employed  in  making  the  applications,  320(7A)  and  paragraph
    320(7B)(ii) had been considered in the determination.  The complaint is
    that the judge at paragraph 15 made findings which are inconsistent and
    contradictory to those made in paragraph 17.  At paragraph 15 the judge
    said this:

         "Therefore despite the fact that the entry  clearance  officer  did
         not comply with directions and  produce  the  relevant  information
         from the  Albanian  border  guards  it  is  quite  clear  that  the
         appellants have each individually given false  information  to  the
         entry clearance officers."

    At paragraph 16 the Judge said:

         "I therefore conclude that the decision to  refuse  the  appellants
         entry clearance as visitors was correct under paragraph 320(7A)  of
         the immigration rules.   The  appellants'  appeals  must  therefore
         fail."

 3. At paragraph 17 of the decision he returned to the issue and  concluded
    in this way:

         "Therefore,  having  considered  the  issue  and  heard   all   the
         representations I conclude that there is insufficient  evidence  to
         show  that  the  appellants  utilised  deception  in  any  of   the
         applications for entry clearance that they have made."

 4. That conclusion contradicts  paragraph  15  and  it  is  impossible  to
    reconcile  the  two  conclusions.   There  is  no  logical  basis   for
    preserving one set of findings in preference to  the  other.   On  that
    basis I am satisfied that the error is material.  It follows from  that
    that the case will have to be re-decided.  The issue of deception under
    paragraph 320(7A) has to be decided, because this is an appeal to which
    the old rules apply the provisions of  paragraph  41  and  whether  the
    Appellants can meet those provisions will also need to be determined.

NOTICE OF DECISION

 5. For the reasons given I set aside the decision of Judge Mitchell  remit
    the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  by  a  different
    judge.

 6. I have given directions separately but those directions are that:

      i) there is a one hour time estimate;

     ii) there will be one witness

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 7th August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

To The Respondent
Fee Award

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable in respect  of  the  appeal
to the Upper Tribunal. I make no fee award at this stage in respect  of  the
fee payable for the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal as that  is  a  matter
to be decided dependent on the outcome of the remitted hearing.


Signed   Date 7th August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

