
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13752/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 17th September, 2014                      |On 18th November, 2014      |
|Signed 17th November, 2014                   |                            |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                           MR IMTIAZ AKRAM CHEEMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Qureshi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  17th  March,
    1987 and who made application for entry clearance to  visit  family  in
    the United Kingdom for one month under paragraph  41  of  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules  HC  395,  as  amended  ("the  Immigration
    Rules").  His application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on
    18th June, 2013 and the appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.
    His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mitchell  at  Taylor
    House on 31st March, 2014.  In  a  determination  promulgated  on  15th
    April, 2014, the judge noted that the appellant was  not  a  qualifying
    family member  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family
    Visitor) Regulations 2012.  The grounds of appeal merely asserted  that
    the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the European  Convention  for
    the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms  were  breached
    by the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.

2.   The judge noted that the appellant  had  previously  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom indicating that he intended to stay for one  month,  but
    actually stayed for just under six months.  He noted that the appellant
    is single with no dependants and claims that he is a  landlord  with  a
    total monthly income of 46,000 Pakistani rupees.  Evidence submitted on
    the appellant's behalf did not indicate that  he  received  any  income
    from property he owned.  The Immigration Judge heard evidence from  the
    sponsor, a British citizen who confirmed that  he  was  now  ill.   The
    Sponsor requires the removal of a tumour, but has delayed his operation
    pending the arrival of the appellant.

3.   The judge noted that the sponsor,

         "came across as being slightly cantankerous and unwilling to listen
         and able to ignore or just not take notice of  anything  which  did
         not  please  him.   He  almost  certainly  would  be  a   difficult
         patient.".


    At paragraph 22 the judge noted:-

         "This viewpoint is reinforced by the fact that he said in his  oral
         evidence that he does not wish to have care from any female  person
         and insists on a male carer.  The hospital also has had  difficulty
         in communicating with him on occasions and has apologised  for  not
         being successful in doing so."


4.   A letter sent by the sponsor's general  medical  practitioner  confirms
    that the sponsor has indicated that he has no-one else to care for  him
    in the United Kingdom except his nephew who has agreed to be  with  him
    during his medical treatment.  The judge  noted  that  in  a  statement
    appearing in the appellant's bundle he claims to  be  a  farmer  owning
    agricultural land and a basement shop and  he  claims  that  he  has  a
    property business which generates 85,000 Pakistani  rupees  per  month.
    He estimates his income to be in the region of 45,600 rupees per  month
    because that is his disposable income after tax  and  expenditure.   He
    claims also to receive approximately 1,000,000 rupees per year from his
    agricultural crops.  At paragraph 38 the judge said:-


         "For the purpose of this appeal I conclude that there is  a  family
         or private life relationship between the appellant and the sponsor.
          This is supported by the fact that the appellant  is  willing  and
         able to travel many thousands of miles across the world to care for
         the sponsor.  He would also be put to the inconvenience  of  having
         to arrange for other people to look after his business interests in
         Pakistan.  This is likely to cost him a significant amount of money
         which he would not otherwise not have to spend (sic)."


5.   The judge noted a bank statement in the appellant's bundle which  shows
    that the account fluctuates considerably and on occasions  the  balance
    falls to below 800 rupees.  The account is clearly a business  account,
    but he notes that there are no documents relating to produce  from  the
    land the appellant owns and that there was no evidence before the judge
    relating to  the  appellant's  property  business.   The  judge  quoted
    paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27  and  noted  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He appeared to think  that  the
    appellant failed to meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    because he had failed to demonstrate  his  personal  circumstances  and
    income in Pakistan.  In actual fact it was of course because he was not
    related to the sponsor in a manner required by the Immigration  Appeals
    (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012.

6.   The judge set out paragraph  17  of  Razgar  in  full,  but  failed  to
    attempt to answer any of the questions save  for  the  first  one,  the
    third one and the last one.  At paragraphs 47 and  48  the  judge  said
    this:-

         "The decision if it did breach the appellant's and sponsor's rights
         under Article 8 of the ECHR would be in accordance  with  the  law.
         The appellant has failed to meet  the  other  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules for the reasons set out above.


         48.   The  Immigration  Rules  do  have  the  legitimate   aim   of
             maintaining effective immigration control and the  rights  and
             freedoms of others and implicitly the  economic  wellbeing  of
             the United Kingdom.  Having considered the  evidence  and  the
             representations that have  been  made  I  consider  that  such
             interference is clearly proportionate to the legitimate public
             end  sought  to  be  achieved.   I   therefore   dismiss   the
             appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR."

7.   The judge went on to dismiss the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    appearing not to recognise the fact that there  was  no  appeal  before
    him.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  VA
    Osborne, who noted at paragraph 38 of the determination the judge  said
    that "for the purposes of this appeal I conclude that there is a family
    or private life relationship between the appellant  and  the  sponsor".
    Judge Osborne went on to say:-

         "5.  This finding  is  against  an  unusual  background  which  has
             compassionate aspects to it.  The appeal cannot succeed  under
             the  Family  Visitor  Regulations  because  the   relationship
             between himself and the sponsor is that of uncle  and  nephew.
             However, the  appellant  maintains  that  the  nature  of  the
             relationship between himself and his uncle is  such  that  his
             uncle regards him  as  a  son  and  further  it  is  only  the
             appellant  who  could  look  after  the   [sponsor]   in   the
             circumstances that he has found himself in and the  uncle  has
             in fact refused to have surgery which is required as a  matter
             of urgent necessity because he wants to wait until  his  'son'
             can be there to assist him.


         6.   Having found that there is 'family or  private  life'  between
             the appellant and his uncle I am satisfied  that  the  central
             issue of the determination would then turn to the question  of
             proportionality.  It is not argued that  the  appellant  could
             meet the requirements of  either  paragraph  FM  or  paragraph
             276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The issue of proportionality
             must be determined following a balancing exercise  and  whilst
             within the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge has
             set out matters which are both in favour  of  the  appellant's
             claim and against it his conclusion was that the appeal  could
             not succeed.  But it is not clear that the First-tier Tribunal
             Judge  has  made  a  specific  finding   on   the   issue   of
             proportionality and in doing so I am  satisfied  that  he  may
             have  made  an  arguable  error  of   law   in   the   unusual
             circumstances of this appeal.  On that basis  I  am  satisfied
             that permission to appeal should be allowed."

8.   At the hearing before me the appellant was represented  by  Ms  Qureshi
    of Counsel and the respondent by Mr  P  Deller  a  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  Counsel drew my attention  to  the  fact  that  at
    paragraph 44 the  judge  had  referred  to  paragraph  7  of  Razgar  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  UKHL  27,  but  then
    went   on   to   decide   the   appeal   without   properly   assessing
    proportionality, despite having found at paragraph  38  that  there  is
    "family or private life relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor".  She reminded me  that  the  appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010 and returned after his post graduation diploma in 2012.
     He returned again in May, 2012, for just under six months to visit the
    sponsor.  The sponsor himself was divorced in 1983 and since  then  his
    children have not had any contact with him.  The appellant  is  now  27
    years of age and, she submitted, there clearly is a family life between
    the appellant and sponsor.  At paragraph 46 of  the  determination  the
    Immigration Judge failed to take into account the emotional  dependency
    of the sponsor on the appellant and the fact that  the  sponsor  cannot
    travel.  For the respondent, Mr Deller suggested that it was  difficult
    to understand quite how the judge had  concluded  that  Article  8  was
    indeed engaged.  At paragraph 38 the judge said:-

         "For the purposes of this appeal I conclude that there is a  family
         or private life relationship between the appellant and the sponsor.
          This is supported by the fact that the appellant  is  willing  and
         able to travel many thousands of miles across the world to care for
         the sponsor.  He will be put to  the  inconvenience  of  having  to
         arrange for other people to look after his  business  interests  in
         Pakistan.  This is likely to cost him a significant amount of money
         which he would not otherwise not had to spend (sic)."


    Mr Deller suggested the case falls apart when one comes to consider the
    second question posed by Lord Bingham at paragraph 17 of Razgar  namely
    will such interference have consequences of such gravity as potentially
    to engage the operation of Article 8.  The sponsor has  chosen  not  to
    have any surgery until the appellant is here.  That  is  a  matter  for
    him.  There  is  adequate  provision  made  under  the  Rules  and  the
    application fails to identify any sufficiently compelling factors which
    would entitle a judge to  allow  the  appeal  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

9.   I reserved my determination.

10.  This is a confused determination.  The judge appears to  be  completely
    unaware that the reason he has an Article 8 appeal before him  is  that
    the appellant does not have a decision which is  appealable  under  the
    Immigration Rules because of the relationship of the appellant  to  the
    sponsor and the operation of the Immigration Appeals  (Family  Visitor)
    Regulations. The judge did not consider whether the appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE but it does not appear  to  have  been
    urged before him and it was certainly not  urged  before  me  that  the
    appellant could meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

11.  Unfortunately, Counsel could not explain what the judge meant  when  he
    concluded that there, "is a family or private life relationship between
    the appellant and the sponsor".  Even if one were to  assume  that  the
    judge was satisfied that there was a  family  life  between  the  adult
    appellant and his uncle with whom he  has  never  actually  permanently
    lived, it was incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  proceed  to  answer  the
    questions posed by Lord Bingham in paragraph 17 of Razgar.   It  cannot
    properly be said that the interference will have  consequence  of  such
    gravity as to potentially engage the operation of Article  8.   In  any
    event Counsel is quite wrong when she  suggests  that  the  Immigration
    Judge failed to  take  into  account  the  circumstances  of  both  the
    appellant and the sponsor in deciding proportionality.  At paragraph 46
    the judge said:-

         "The sponsor in the United Kingdom can receive appropriate  medical
         treatment and care without the  appellant,  coming  to  the  United
         Kingdom.  He may receive more extensive  care  and  be  happier  in
         himself were his nephew to come to  the  United  Kingdom.   Overall
         however I do not consider the decision to  refuse  entry  clearance
         amounts to a breach of either  the  appellant's  or  the  sponsor's
         rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Although there has  been  care
         given by the appellant in the past to the sponsor the decision  was
         made that the appellant should return to his home country where  he
         immediately re-established his private and family  life.   He  only
         wishes to come to the United Kingdom for a relatively short  period
         of time, six months, in  order  to  provide  interim  care  to  the
         sponsor.  I have been informed that the sponsor  cannot  travel  to
         Pakistan although there is no direct medical  evidence  to  support
         this."

12.  There was no evidence before the  judge  that  the  appellant  has  any
    particular nursing or medical qualifications which would enable him  to
    deliver the standard of care which the sponsor may need  following  his
    operation.  The fact that the sponsor cannot travel was  noted  by  the
    judge.  The judge was wrong in paragraph 46 to note that the  appellant
    wanted to come to the United Kingdom for six  months,  because  he  had
    only applied for a family visit visa for one month.  However,  even  if
    it were to be shown that the interference did have consequence of  such
    gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8, it  cannot
    be said that the judge did not perform a proportionality exercise.

13.  Whilst the determination is worrying in that it does  disclose  several
    errors, I do not believe any of them  to  be  material  or  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.  The judge was  entitled  to  find
    that the interference was proportionate to the  legitimate  public  end
    sought to be achieved and there was nothing in the circumstances of the
    appellant or his appeal which could properly be said  to  have  enabled
    the judge to allow the Article 8 appeal outside the Immigration Rules.

14.  I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
     17th November, 2014
