
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13777/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 September 2014                           |On 19 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - ABU DHABI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          SAAD RUBEEN AHMAD SONOURY

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Maciel) allowing Saad Sonoury's appeal  against  a
    refusal to grant him entry clearance as a visitor under para 41 of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 2. For convenience, I will refer hereafter to the parties as they appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant, together with his mother and  grandmother,  applied  for
    entry clearance to visit the  UK  and,  in  particular,  to  visit  the
    appellant's aunt and her family  in  the  UK.   On  7  July  2013,  the
    appellant and his mother and grandmother were refused entry  clearance.
    They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing,  on  30
    April 2014 Judge Maciel allowed each of the appellants'  appeals  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  accepted  Judge  Maciel's  decision  in
    relation to  the  appellant's  mother  and  grandmother.   However,  in
    relation to the appellant the ECO sought permission to  appeal  on  the
    basis that in seeking to visit his aunt, the appellant was not  seeking
    to visit a member of his family falling within the Immigration  Appeals
    (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 (SI 2012/1532) (the "Family  Visitor"
    Regulations) and consequently he only had a limited right of appeal  on
    human rights grounds by virtue of s.88A(1) and (3) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the  "2002  Act").   The  Judge  had,
    therefore, erred in law in allowing the appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and, as the appellant had not relied upon  his  human
    rights in particular Art 8 of the ECHR in his notice of  appeal,  there
    was no valid appeal before Judge Maciel in relation to the appellant.

 5. On 3 June 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parkes) granted the  ECO
    permission to appeal on that ground.  Thus, the appeal came before  me.



The ECO's Submissions

 6. At the hearing, the appellant was not represented and the  sponsor  did
    not appear.  Mr Richards informed  me  that  the  ECO  had  issued  the
    appellant, together with his mother and  grandmother,  entry  clearance
    and they were, as he understood it, already in the  UK.   Nevertheless,
    Mr Richards invited me to determine  the  appeal;  allowing  the  ECO's
    appeal and substituting a decision  that  there  was  no  valid  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the appellant.

 7.  Notice  of  the  hearing  was  sent   to   the   appellant   and   his
    representatives.  Having considered all the circumstances, I  concluded
    that I should in the exercise of my  discretion  proceed  to  hear  the
    appeal in the absence of the appellant's legal representatives and  the
    sponsor in the interests of  justice  (see  rule  38  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698)).

Discussion

 8. Section 88A of the 2002 Act provides, so far as relevant, as follows:

         "(1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) against refusal of
             an application for entry clearance unless the application  was
             made for the purpose of -

             (a)  visiting a person or a class or description prescribed by
                  Regulations for the purposes of this section, ..."

              ....

         (3)  Subsection (1) -

             (a)  does not prevent the bringing of an appeal on  either  or
                  both of the grounds referred to in  Section  84(1)(b)  and
                  (c), ...."

 9. The effect of s.88A(1) is to  limit  the  right  of  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules where an individual is refused entry clearance unless
    the application for entry clearance  was  sought  for  the  purpose  of
    visiting  a  person  defined  by  reference  to  Regulations.   Section
    88A(3)(a) allows "the bringing of an appeal"  notwithstanding  s.88A(1)
    if the individual relies on human rights or race relations grounds (see
    s.84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Act).

10. The relevant Regulations are the Family Visitor Regulations  which  set
    out the required relationships between an applicant for entry clearance
    and the "family member" in the UK.  So far as relevant, reg 2  provides
    as follows:

         "(1) A person ("P") is of a class or description prescribed for the
             purposes of section 88A(1)(a) of the Nationality,  Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002 (entry clearance), if-

             (a)  the applicant for entry clearance ("A") is a member of
                  the family of P; and

             (b)  P's circumstances match those specified in regulation 3.


         (2)  For the purposes of paragraph (1), A is a member of the family
             of P if A is the-

             (a)  spouse, civil partner, father, mother, son, daughter,
                  grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, brother
                  or sister;

             (b)  father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law or sister-in-
                  law;

             (c)  son-in-law or daughter-in-law; or

             (d)  stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter,
                  stepbrother or stepsister;

             of P."


11. In this case, the appellant was not visiting a member of his family  as
    defined in Reg 2(2).   That  list  of  family  relationships  does  not
    include "aunt".

12. Consequently, by virtue of s.88A(1) and (3), the appellant  could  only
    bring an appeal on human rights grounds.  Thus, the Judge erred in  law
    in allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

13. The question is, therefore, whether the  appellant  in  his  notice  of
    appeal and accompanying documents relied  upon  his  human  rights,  in
    particular Art 8 of the ECHR so that he had  a  valid  appeal  on  that
    ground.

14. Section 88A(3)(a) allows "the bringing of an appeal"  on  human  rights
    grounds when an individual does not  fall  within  the  Family  Visitor
    Regulations.  The validity of the appeal  must  be  determined  at  the
    point at which the appeal is filed with the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appeal is either validly brought at that point in time or  it  is  not.
    The reliance upon human rights grounds must, therefore, be at the point
    that the notice of appeal is filed, usually in the relevant section  of
    the IAFT-2 form.  It may well suffice, however, that human  rights  are
    relied upon in documents that accompany the form.  The important  point
    is that reliance upon human rights subsequent to  the  lodging  of  the
    notice of appeal will not satisfy s.88A(3)(a).

15. Further, I accept that it  may  not  be  necessary  for  an  individual
    explicitly to refer to Art 8 of the ECHR.   Nevertheless,  it  must  be
    clear that the substance of an individual's human rights is relied upon
    when the notice of  appeal  is  filed  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Particularly where an appellant is not legally represented,  care  must
    be taken to determine the substance, rather than merely looking to  the
    form, of the grounds of appeal.

16. The form IAFT-2 at section D, "Grounds of your  appeal"  sets  out  the
    grounds on which the appellant relied as follows:

         "1.   The  application  for  entry  clearance  was  made  with  the
             Appellant's father (Mohammed Ahmad Sonoury), who was  applying
             for entry clearance at the same time.  The Appellant's  father
             is proposing to pay for the visit.  The  Appellant's  father's
             application was refused, and the Appellant's  application  was
             refused on the basis that no other reason had been put forward
             for  the  Appellant  to  travel  without  his   father.    The
             Appellant's father is appealing  his  decision  on  the  basis
             that:

             A.   The Respondent failed to give any or adequate  regard  to
                  the  documentary  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  father's
                  business  activities  and  earnings  in   Pakistan.    The
                  Respondent refers only to  a  blank  letter  headed  'Saad
                  Traders' that was submitted  with  the  application.   The
                  Respondent   has   failed   to   acknowledge   the   other
                  documentation submitted with  the  application,  including
                  the tax returns, period of ownership of agricultural  land
                  with  evaluation  certificates,  challan   receipts,   tax
                  payments and expenses forms.

             B.   The Respondent failed to give any or adequate  regard  to
                  the  documentary  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  father's
                  savings.   The  Respondent  states  that  the  Appellant's
                  father has not  demonstrated  that  he  has  savings,  but
                  failed to  take  into  consideration  a  letter  from  the
                  Assistant Director of the National Savings  Centre  of  23
                  April 2013, with accompanying statement,  confirming  that
                  the Appellant's father held Rs.2,000,500 (two million  and
                  five hundred rupees) as at 23 April 2013.

             C.   The Respondent failed to give any or adequate  regard  to
                  the  documentary  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  father's
                  assets.  The Respondent states that  the  Appellant's  son
                  has not demonstrated that he has any assets  in  Pakistan.
                  The Respondent has failed to acknowledge  the  sale  deeds
                  for the plots of land, the register  of  owners  of  land,
                  challan   forms   confirming   payments   and   evaluation
                  certificates   from   architects   confirming   value   of
                  properties owned by Appellant's father.

             D.   The Respondent failed to give any or adequate  regard  to
                  the  documentary  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  father's
                  dependents.  The Respondent states  that  the  Appellant's
                  father stated that he has no dependents in Pakistan.   The
                  Respondent failed to consider the information provided  in
                  the letter of UKICS confirming that he has  a  mother  and
                  son [the Appellant] (who are applying with  him  to  visit
                  the UK), as well as a wife and two other children who will
                  remain in Pakistan.  The Respondent failed to consider the
                  marriage  and  birth  certificates  submitted   with   the
                  application.

         2.   The Respondent failed to give any or adequate consideration to
             the reasons in support of the Appellant's intention to  return
             to Pakistan at the end of the visit and in particular that his
             family (including mother and  two  siblings)  will  remain  in
             Pakistan, and that he attends school in Pakistan.

         3.   The Respondent failed to give any or adequate consideration to
             the  letter  from  the  Immigration  Counselling  Service  and
             documents provided by the Sponsor as to the financial  support
             and accommodation that will  be  available  to  the  Appellant
             throughout his stay."

17. Those grounds do not make any reference to Art 8 and, in substance, are
    directed towards the issues raised by the Entry Clearance Officer under
    para 41 of the Immigration Rules.  Likewise, the covering  letter  from
    the appellant's legal representatives, Wolferstans, Solicitors dated  7
    August 2013 makes no reference to Art 8 of the ECHR.

18. The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  relied  exclusively  upon  matters
    relevant to the Immigration Rules and placed no reliance upon his human
    rights, in particular Art 8 of the ECHR.  Therefore,  s.88A(3)  of  the
    2002 Act did not apply and, as a result,  there  was  no  valid  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

19. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in allowing the  appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  I set that decision aside.

20. I substitute a decision that there was no valid appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.





                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
