







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13962/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 16 October 2014                           |On: 28 October 2014          |
|Prepared: 27 October 2014                     |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer: Dhaka

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Marjan Chowdhury
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandolo, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Bhebhe, Legal Representative

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      entry clearance officer and the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is the child of Mrs Farida Chowhury. Both are Bangladeshi
      nationals. They appealed against the decision of the  entry  clearance
      officer dated 9th June 2013 refusing their application  for  an  entry
      clearance to the UK as visitors for a three week period, in  order  to
      meet his uncle, aunt and cousins.


   3. His mother's appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  a
      determination promulgated on 7th August 2014.  The  claimant's  appeal
      was also allowed.  The Judge recognised that his appeal was restricted
      to Article 8 issues, and found that it had been  properly  raised.  He
      found that it was "really important that this young child is  able  to
      see his uncle and aunt and indeed  his  young  cousins  and  that  can
      clearly only happen at the present time if this visit is permitted  to
      take place." [29]


   4. He furthermore stated at paragraph 30 that he  has  always  understood
      that young children will always be able to accompany an adult in these
      kinds of family  circumstances  without  even  making  an  application
      themselves. He stated at  paragraph  31  that  "if  indeed  the  child
      appellant only has a valid Article  8  appeal,  I  cover  that  in  my
      decision but trust that the respondent will take a  sensible  view  in
      any event as the appeal of the adult appellant has been allowed."


   5. He accordingly allowed the claimant's appeal.


   6. On 27th August 2014, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  French  granted  the
      entry   clearance   officer   permission   to   appeal   against   the
      determination. He found it arguable that the Judge did not explain  on
      what basis Article 8 was engaged for this child proposing to visit  an
      uncle, aunt and cousins. He  also  said  that  the  Judge  misdirected
      himself regarding his understanding that young children  would  always
      be allowed to accompany  an  adult  in  family  circumstances.  Having
      stated that it is really important that this young child  is  able  to
      see his uncle and aunt and cousins, it was unclear on  what  reasoning
      he found Article 8 potentially of relevance.


   7. Mr Kandola relied on the entry  clearance  officer's  grounds.  It  is
      clear that the claimant only had a limited right of  appeal  (that  is
      not disputed). The Article 8 claim had not been raised in the  grounds
      of appeal, or in the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal.




   8. He submitted that in any event, the basis  for  the  positive  finding
      under Article 8 had not been made out.


   9. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Bhebhe submitted that the  child  should
      have been allowed to see his aunts and relatives. The  child  had  the
      right to remain with his mother on family life grounds.


  10. Mr Kandola submitted however that there  is  no  suggestion  that  the
      child would not be able to remain  with  his  mother.  Any  separation
      would not be a consequence of the decision. The child can still remain
      with his mother. However, the issue is whether he has a viable 'family
      law case' with regard to the relatives abroad. He submitted that  that
      had not been shown. Nor was it proved that there was a breach  of  his
      right to respect for private life.


     Assessment


  11. The parties agreed that there is no right of appeal in this case for a
      family visitor applying to visit an uncle, aunt or cousin. The Judge's
      assertion that young children should always be allowed to accompany an
      adult in these kinds of family circumstances without  even  making  an
      application himself is not  correct.  Furthermore,  the  child  has  a
      father in Bangladesh with whom he could remain during  the  course  of
      his mother's visit to the UK.


  12. I find that there has been insufficient reasoning by the Judge  as  to
      why in these circumstances Article 8 had been engaged. The factors  to
      which  he  referred  were  not  relevant  to  that  issue   and   were
      insufficient in themselves to engage Article 8.


  13. In the circumstances, I find that the decision of the First-tier Judge
      involved the making of an error on a point of law. I  accordingly  set
      it aside and re-make the decision.


  14. In making the decision, I note that there was not  even  a  suggestion
      either in the grounds of appeal or in the skeleton argument before the
      First-tier Tribunal that the claimant wished to pursue an appeal based
      on human rights, to which his right of appeal was restricted.


  15. Accordingly, there were no relevant facts presented  to  the  Tribunal
      warranting  the  exercise  of  jurisdiction  on  the   limited   basis
      available.


  16. I accordingly find that the decision of the  entry  clearance  officer
      was in accordance with the law and  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family
      Visitor) Regulations 2012.


     Decision


      Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I re-make it
      dismissing the     claimant's appeal.


     No anonymity order made.




                               Signed            Date:  27 October 2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




