
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/14077/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd November 2014                         |On 20th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                               MRS XIAOLI GONG
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - MANILA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Timson, Counsel, instructed by Sandbrook
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mrs Xiaoli Gong, date of birth  8th  August  1951  is  a
    citizen of China.  Having considered all the  circumstances  I  do  not
    make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Harris promulgated on 23rd May 2014.   I  have  for
    the purposes of the present proceedings kept  the  designation  of  the
    parties as they originally appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. However I am mindful that this is an appeal by the  Respondent  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Harris.

 4. The Appellant was seeking to come to the United Kingdom as a visitor to
    visit family members.  The issue that was raised before the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that the Appellant  had  made  previous  applications  for
    visas and those applications had been refused.  At the time  of  making
    the previous applications the Appellant appears to have been living  in
    mainland China and had a passport from mainland China.  It appears that
    the Appellant moved to Hong Kong and obtained  a  new  passport  issued
    from Hong Kong.

 5. In a refusal letter dated 21 June 2012 in respect of the last of  those
    previous applications it was noted that the  appellant  had  failed  to
    disclose two previous applications for visit visas and had stated  that
    this was her first passport. That application had been refused at  that
    stage under paragraph 320 (7A), where a person has dishonestly produced
    false documents or provided false information. The refusal letter  also
    referred to any future application been  refused  under  paragraph  320
    (7B). However that refusal and the assertion  that  the  appellant  had
    acted dishonestly had never been the subject of an appeal.

 6. In refusing the present application  the  Respondent  had  refused  the
    Appellant's application in accordance with  paragraph  320(7A)  on  the
    basis that having previously been refused because  of  providing  false
    information this application  was  automatically  being  refused  under
    paragraph 320(7B).

 7. Judge Harris specifically looked at those issues and made findings with
    regard to whether the Appellant had in the past  used  deception.   The
    judge came to the conclusion that the Appellant had not used  deception
    and in effect had not been dishonest.

 8. The Grounds of Appeal assert that the two previous refusals referred to
    in the present refusal were not before  the  Tribunal.   Therefore  the
    refusals on the basis, that the Appellant had in previous  applications
    dishonestly provided false information or false documents, was  not  an
    issue open to the judge to adjudicate upon.   Accordingly  the  judge's
    finding that the Appellant had a new passport  and  that  her  previous
    passport had been cancelled and that the Appellant was not dishonest in
    failing to disclose  her  previous  refusals  or  the  details  of  the
    previous passport was not open to the judge in the  circumstances.   It
    was submitted that the refusal under paragraph 320(7B) was a  mandatory
    refusal and the judge had failed to deal  with  conflicts  of  fact  on
    material matters.

 9. In essence the Respondent is alleging that it is not open to the  judge
    to review the allegations made by a previous Entry Clearance Officer in
    a previous letter of refusal.  That  previous  letter  of  refusal  was
    produced to the judge.

10. I drew to the attention of the parties in the proceedings the  case  of
    Soyemi v SSHD [VA/36056/2009] which deals specifically with this issue.



11. The first time that the issue of the Appellant  having  used  deception
    needed to be proved was before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Harris.   A
    decision by an Entry Clearance Officer is  not  a  binding  finding  of
    fact.  Where it is alleged that on a previous  occasion  the  Appellant
    has produced false documents and the Appellant asserts that he has not,
    it is for the Respondent to substantiate that false documents have been
    used.  There is no principle whereby if the Appellant fails  to  appeal
    against a previous decision the facts alleged within that decision  are
    not subsequently challengeable.

12. Rather the contrary it is for the respective parties to prove the facts
    relied upon.   In  the  present  situation  the  Respondent  bears  the
    responsibility of proving that false information was provided and  that
    the Appellant acted dishonestly in order to  substantiate  the  refusal
    under paragraph 320(7B).

13. The judge was entitled to consider whether or not false  documents  had
    been used on a previous occasion.  The judge considered the appropriate
    case law specifically AA [2010] EWCA Civ 713.   Having  considered  the
    appropriate case law the judge made specific findings  with  regard  to
    the circumstances in which the Appellant had failed to  disclose  on  a
    subsequent application the fact  that  she  had  been  refused  on  two
    previous applications  and  the  fact  that  she  had  had  a  previous
    passport.  The judge was entitled to find on the basis of the  evidence
    that he was satisfied that the Appellant and the Sponsor had given very
    detailed and plausible explanations as to why the previous history  had
    not been disclosed.  The judge has assessed the  previous  applications
    giving reasons for finding that they had been dismissed on the basis of
    extremely flimsy evidence.  The first  had  been  refused  because  the
    payslips required to prove the Sponsor's income had been produced a day
    late and the second application had been refused because it  was  noted
    that there had been a first refusal.

14. In light of the full explanation given by the  Sponsor  the  judge  was
    satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  false  information
    dishonestly.  That was a finding of fact that the judge was entitled to
    make on the evidence before him.  Further that was an  issue  that  was
    before the judge that he was obliged  to  consider  and  make  findings
    upon.

15. Accordingly taking all the evidence into account the judge was entitled
    to come to the conclusions that he did.  There is no material error  of
    law within the determination by the judge.  The decision to allow  this
    appeal under the Immigration Rules stands.



Signed        Date 20th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

