








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/15888/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 10 November 2014                        |On: 28 November 2014           |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer: Abuja

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Miss Emmanuela Nskian-Stephen
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreereman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer to the appellant as the entry
    clearance officer and the respondent as the claimant.


 2. The claimant was born on 14 March 2012 and is a Nigerian national.  She
    is the daughter of Mrs Mpapameari  Nskian.   The  latter's  appeal  was
    allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appellant  only  appeals  the
    decision allowing the claimant's appeal.


 3. The notice of hearing setting out the date, time and place  was  served
    on the claimant's sponsor on 25 April 2014 at the address on record.  I
    stood the matter down until shortly before 4pm  on  10  November  2014.
    However, there was still no appearance for the claimant. I  accordingly
    proceeded to hear the appeal in  accordance  with  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules.


 4. The claimant's and her mother's appeals were both allowed by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rhys-Davies in a determination  promulgated  on  7  July
    2014. She allowed the appeals under the Immigration Rules.


 5. She found that it was credible that the claimant and her mother had  an
    "entirely legitimate reason" to visit the UK. It was reasonable for the
    sponsor and Mr Williams to offer reciprocal hospitality to Mrs  Nskian.
    This was to be for a short holiday in the UK. She would wish  to  bring
    her daughter, the claimant, with her while the older boys would be able
    to stay with their father during her short absence.


 6. The Judge considered their appeals on the merits  and  found  that  the
    mother and the claimant had satisfied  the  relevant  provisions  under
    paragraphs 41 and 46A of the Immigration Rules.


 7. On 14th October 2014, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  granted  the
    entry clearance officer permission to appeal against the determination.
    It was arguable that the  Judge  had  failed  to  appreciate  that  the
    claimant sought to visit individuals who were not within the  specified
    class of persons within the 2012 Regulations in  force  from  9th  July
    2012. There was accordingly only a limited right of appeal. The grounds
    did not raise any Equality Act complaint and only raised Article  8  in
    the "baldest terms."


 8. Judge Holmes stated that  the  Judge  purported  to  allow  the  appeal
    arguably without making any finding that she wished to visit  a  person
    within the specified class. There was no finding  made  in  respect  of
    discrimination. Nor was there a  finding  that  the  decision  was  not
    proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  interest  that  the   entry
    clearance officer sought to protect.


 9. Ms Sreeraman noted that the date of application was 5 June 2013. It was
    refused on 26 June  2013.  The  Immigration  Appeals  (Family  Visitor)
    Regulations 2012 came into force on 9 July 2012  and  were  accordingly
    applicable to this appeal. The claimant was not a  relevant  member  of
    the family of the sponsor. She is  a  niece  of  the  sponsor  and  her
    husband. Unlike her  mother,  who  wished  to  visit  her  partner,  Mr
    Williams, the claimant had no relevant family member.


10. The Judge made no findings and did not consider or engage with  Article
    8. In particular, there was no consideration as to whether in any event
    the decision of the appellant was proportionate in the circumstances.


11. The changes made by the Crime and Courts Act (s.52)  amended  s.88A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 so as  to  remove  the
    right of appeal for persons visiting specified family members. Although
    they are still able to bring an  appeal  on  the  residual  grounds  in
    s.84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Act, namely on  human  rights  and  race
    relations grounds, this restricted claimants to those grounds.


12. The entry clearance officer noted in the reasons for refusal dated 26th
    June 2013 that the claimant's  right  of  appeal  was  limited  to  the
    grounds referred to in s.84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act.  However, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did not consider the limited right of appeal  which
    accordingly limited her jurisdiction, but allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    merits.


13. I have had regard to the sponsor's witness statement before the  First-
    tier Tribunal. She is the elder sister of Mrs Nskian. She is  the  aunt
    of the claimant. Her partner is Mr Williams. They invited the  claimant
    and her mother to the UK as a thank you gift for the  assistance  given
    during the burial of their mother.  There  is  no  reference  to  human
    rights, and in particular Article 8.


14. The grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal contained  generic
    grounds including  the  contention  that  the  decision  is  wrong  and
    contrary to the UK's obligations under the European Convention of Human
    Rights. It is contended that "of the client's  human  rights  would  be
    breached under Article 8 as there is private and  family  life  in  the
    UK."  There are no  grounds  or  evidence  produced  relating  to  race
    discrimination or discrimination.


15. I find that the refusal of her application did not breach her Article 8
    rights. There is no interference with her family life as  it  currently
    exists. She will remain with her father when her mother visits the  UK.
    There are two other young children in the family.  Nor  are  there  any
    grounds relating to discrimination or race relations.


16. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
    of a material error of law. I accordingly set aside that  determination
    and re-make it.


17. The claimant has not provided any evidence  that  the  entry  clearance
    officer's  decision  was  unlawful  on  the  basis   of   any   alleged
    discrimination in the exercise of public function so far as relating to
    race within the Equality Act 2010. Nor has any evidence  been  produced
    that the decision was unlawful pursuant to s.6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998 and in particular that the entry clearance officer acted  contrary
    to the Human Rights Convention rendering the decision incompatible with
    her Article 8 rights.


18. I accordingly find that the claimant has not shown on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that her right to respect for family or private life  has
    been breached or that she has in any way been discriminated against.


    NOTICE OF DECISION


    The claimant's appeal is dismissed.


    I set aside the claimant's fee award.







                                   Signed   Date 27/11/2014


                                   C R Mailer
                                   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



