
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/15000/2013
                                                               VA/14991/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th September 2015               |On 17th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR MD MURAKIB ALI
                               MRS Atia BEGUM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No representative but Sponsor, Mr Kaysor Ali
attended


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. MD Murakib Ali and Atia Begum are nationals of  Bangladesh.   They  are
    husband and wife born  on  31st  December  1955  and  26th  March  1962
    respectively.  On or about 20th May 2013 they and  each  of  them  made
    application for entry clearance for the purpose of a family visit.  The
    named relatives which appear at page 7 of the applications are  Md.  K.
    Ali as niece (though that was in fact  an  error  because  he  attended
    before me and was plainly a nephew) and Rabia Begum  Zad,  sister.   On
    5th June 2013 decisions were made to refuse the applications. An appeal
    was lodged with the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. On 11th November 2014 the matter came before Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lester sitting at Taylor House in London.   Having  heard  the
    evidence she allowed the appeals.

 3. Not content with those decisions, by Notice dated  15th  December  2014
    the Secretary of State made application for permission to appeal.   The
    basis upon which application was made challenged  the  jurisdiction  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to entertain  the  appeal  at  all.   That  was
    because the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 which
    took effect on 9th July 2012 and therefore were material and in  effect
    at the date of the application provided that it was  only  where  there
    was an intention to visit a certain category of persons that an  appeal
    might be brought and that did not include a nephew.

 4. The focus of the decision of Judge Lester was only on  the  nephew,  Mr
    Kaysor Ali.  Not surprisingly therefore when  the  Secretary  of  State
    looked to the decision it appeared on the face of  it  that  there  had
    been  an  error  of  law  because  the  only  Sponsor  named  in   that
    determination was the nephew.

 5. On 28th January 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Osborne  refused
    the Secretary of State permission to  appeal  but  subsequently  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Saini, on 6th May 2015 granted  permission  though
    not without some criticism of the  Secretary  of  State  which  in  the
    circumstances may be unfair.

 6. The matter thus comes before me.  Mr Wilding, with his  usual  fairness
    immediately pointed out that although the grounds as drafted, based  as
    they were on the basis that the sole Sponsor was a nephew  was  correct
    in principle, accepted also that the judge, though wrong  to  entertain
    the appeal on the basis of the nephew, had not materially erred because
    absent any challenge to  the  findings  the  application  was  also  in
    respect of the sister of one  of  the  Respondents  and  therefore  the
    sister-in-law of the other.

 7. Mr Wilding reminded me of the guidance in the case of Ajakaiye (visitor
    appeals - right so appeal) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00375 which is authority
    for the proposition that the Tribunal should look to the purpose of the
    visit and that in determining if the person  is  a  qualified  relative
    regard may be had to extraneous evidence.  In this case  clearly  there
    was evidence in the application form which had been overlooked  by  the
    judge.  I am informed by Mr Wilding that the appeal in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was in a float list and therefore it would be unfair  to  make
    further or any real criticism of the judge other than to  observe  that
    it would be wise in cases such as this to look at the application form.
     Be that as  it  may  Mr  Wilding  rightly  conceded  that  he  was  in
    difficulties in pursuing this appeal because he could  not  demonstrate
    any material error of law.  I entirely agree.  In  those  circumstances
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and for the avoidance  of
    doubt the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal are affirmed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
