
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16547/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th August 2014                              |On 19th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                           ms THELMA YAYRA TETTEH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Ephraim-Adejumo, Counsel, instructed by
                    Welbeck Anin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana who appealed against  the  decision
    of the Respondent on 15th July  2013  to  refuse  to  grant  her  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor under paragraph 41 of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hodgkinson who dismissed it.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  The judge had taken issue  with  a
    letter from H O Polytechnic dated 18 June 2013 which indicated that the
    Appellant was a first year student.  However, as stated in the grounds,
    there was ample other evidence to suggest that this was a typing  error
    and that evidence had not been taken into account by the judge.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Garratt and  in  a
    Rule 24 Notice dated 1st July 204 the Respondent  did  not  oppose  the
    Appellant's application.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on the above  date.

The Oral Hearing

 5. Before me the parties agreed that the  decision  should  be  set  aside
    because the judge had fallen into making an error in law.

 6. For the Appellant Counsel asked that the matter  be  adjourned  as  the
    main Sponsor was not available - the  Tribunal  had  been  given  prior
    notice of this but had refused to adjourn today's hearing.

 7. The Home Office had no objection to this course.

 8. In these circumstances the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is
    set aside in its entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal  are
    to stand.  Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act  and  of  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial fact finding  necessary
    for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate  to  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

10. I set aside the decision.

11. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


