
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16629/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided On The Papers at Field House  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8 July 2015                        |On 10 July 2013                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                          NITINKUMAR RAMJI BHUDIYA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MUMBAI
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. There  is  no  need  for  and  I  do  not  make  an  order  restricting
    publication.

 2. This is an appeal against the respondent's decision on 19 July 2013  to
    refuse the appellant entry clearance as a family visitor.   The  appeal
    came before a First-tier Tribunal Judge on 27 May 2014  but  the  judge
    ruled that the appellant did not have a right of appeal  and  so  there
    was nothing more for him to determine.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher gave  permission  to  appeal  because,
    although the appellant had indicated a wish to visit his aunt, who  for
    the purposes of the appeal is not a "family  member",  the  grounds  of
    appeal and the application made it plain that the appellant also wished
    to visit his mother. It followed that his appeal was a "family  visitor
    appeal" and was, at that time at least, an appealable decision.

 4. On 17 June 2015 the respondent served  a  Rule  24  notice  stating  in
    terms, "The respondent concedes that there was a right of appeal".  The
    same notice made it clear that  the  respondent  did  not  concede  the
    appeal and intended to support the respondent's decision.

 5. The case came before me as duty judge to consider and  application  for
    an interpreter.  Given the wholly appropriate concession  made  by  the
    respondent the Tribunal would clearly find there had been an  error  of
    law.  The  Tribunal  would  then  have  to  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and then decide whether it was best to correct  the
    defect at that hearing or direct the case be decided again in the First-
    tier.  Although a hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  would  have  the
    advantage of speed in what is becoming a rather stale case, it would be
    potentially unfair to the appellant for the Upper  Tribunal  to  decide
    the appeal. The appellant not had a fair hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal and his appeal rights from the decision of the Upper  Tribunal
    are limited.

 6. I caused my  clerk  to  contact  the  parties.   I  am  told  that  the
    respondent agrees to the  appeal  being  decided  in  the  way  I  have
    indicated.   I  have  a   letter   from   the   appellant's   nominated
    representative in the United Kingdom, a Mrs Siyani, in  which  she  has
    signed a copy of the letter sent by the Tribunal service to  her  on  6
    July 2015 and I take that as her consent.

 7. I remind myself that pursuant to Rule  34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 the Upper  Tribunal  may  make  a  decision
    without a hearing although it must have regard to any view expressed by
    a party.

 8. In the circumstances  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and allow the appeal to the extent that  the  appeal  must  be
    decided again in the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decision

    The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside. The appeal must be decided again in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

    The order refunding his fee is set aside.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 July 2015                    |

