
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16007/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 5 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                              mrs rasoolan bibi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant (but
see below)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, Mrs Rasoolan Bibi, a citizen of  Pakistan,  applied  for
    entry clearance to the UK as a family  visitor.   Her  application  was
    refused on 8 July 2013.  Her ensuing appeal, at which both parties were
    represented, was heard by Judge Harries sitting at Newport  on  22  May
    2014 and allowed in a determination of 27 May promulgated the following
    day.

2.   On 4 June the Respondent applied for permission to  appeal.   This  was
    granted on 16 June by Designated Judge Garratt in the following terms:

         "1.   The  respondent  applies  in  time  to  appeal  against   the
             determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J Harries in
             which she allowed the  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
             respondent  to  refuse  entry  clearance  as  a   visitor   in
             accordance  with  the  provisions  of  paragraph  41  of   the
             Immigration Rules.


         2.   The  grounds  point  out  that  as  the  respondent's  refusal
             decision was made after the coming into force of Section 52 of
             the Crimes and Courts Act 2013 on 25th June  2013  the  appeal
             rights  for  visitors   to   UK   were   limited   to   racial
             discrimination and human  rights.   The  judge  was  therefore
             wrong  to  determine  the  appeal  under  the  provisions   of
             paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.


         3.   The grounds are arguable.  Permission is granted."


3.   On 23 June the Respondent's  solicitors,  SZ  Solicitors,  submitted  a
    Rule 24 Response.  Essentially this submits that the Appellant made her
    application on 19 June 2013, which was before the  change  in  the  law
    which took effect on 25 June 2013.  Thus this change did  not  bear  on
    the decision, and the judge had jurisdiction  to  consider  the  appeal
    substantively.  On 3 July 2014 SZ  Solicitors  wrote  to  the  Tribunal
    excusing their attendance at the error of law  hearing  and  requesting
    that the issue be determined by reference to their Rule 24 response.

4.   At the error of law hearing Mr Jarvis explained  that  there  were  two
    Home Office information  systems.   One  recorded  the  application  as
    having been made online on 19 June 2013 and the other on 25 June  2013,
    so the position was not entirely clear to the  Respondent.   Mr  Jarvis
    properly acknowledged that the  issue  of  jurisdiction  had  not  been
    raised by the Respondent at the hearing before Judge Harries.

Determination

5.   Two entries  in  the  UKBA  print-out  of  the  application  for  entry
    clearance state that  the  date  that  the  application  was  submitted
    online, and the date of  the  application,  were  19  June  2013.   The
    Appellant is entitled to rely upon this, and is not to be disadvantaged
    by the existence of a different record of the Respondent, which she had
    not apparently seen, giving a different date for the application.

6.    On  that  basis  the  application  was  made  seven  days  before  the
    commencement of Section 52 of the Crimes  and  Courts  Act  2013.   The
    Act's restriction on visit appeals was not  therefore  in  point.   The
    judge was entitled and bound to determine the appeal substantively, and
    did so.

7.   The application for permission  to  appeal  is  based  on  this  ground
    alone.  It does not therefore reveal any error of law.   Permission  to
    appeal is refused, and the determination is upheld.

Decision

8.   The original decision does not contain any error of law and is upheld.


Signed
         Dated: 30 July 2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
