
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16887/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decisions & Reason Promulgated   |
|On 17th December 2014                     |2nd January 2015                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         MISS SHAH AYSHA AKTAR JENY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT GIVEN)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Clayton, promulgated on 2nd September 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 14th August 2014.  In the determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Shah Aysha Aktar Jeny, and  her  mother,  Somarun
    Nesa Lucky, both of whom had applied together to come to the  UK  on  a
    visitor's visa.  The Respondent Entry Clearance  Officer,  subsequently
    applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal against the allowing
    of the appeal of Miss Shah Aysha Aktar Jeny, the Appellant, (though the
    allowing of the appeal of Mrs Somarun Nesa Lucky the  mother)  was  not
    appealed by the Respondent Entry Clearance Officer.   It  is  in  these
    circumstances, that the appeal comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  4th  August
    1991, and is currently 23 years of age.  She applied with  her  mother,
    to come to the UK on a family visit.  The evidence before the judge was
    that she had three sisters aged 21, 18 and 13, and  a  brother  of  11.
    She was the eldest.  The evidence was that,

         "Only Miss Jeny had been invited for a holiday  because  they  were
         very close (i.e. with Miss Salma Miah,  the  first  cousin  of  the
         Appellant).  The evidence given by Miss Salma Miah, the Appellant's
         first cousin in the UK, was that, she last saw her three years  ago
         but talked perhaps three or four times per month on the  telephone.
         The application was initially for her aunt and cousin  to  come  to
         her wedding.  She had not invited any family before.  Her aunt  was
         still married and the husband worked selling crops.  Miss Jeny  was
         not studying or in work" (see paragraph 5).

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge considered the close relationship between  Miss  Salma  Miah,
    the  Appellant's  first  cousin,  and  the  Appellant   herself.    The
    Appellant's mother, Mrs  Lucky,  could  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, and having done so, the judge allowed her appeal because she was
    in employment, had a husband back in  Bangladesh,  and  four  children,
    whom she was leaving behind (see paragraph 16).  With  respect  to  the
    Appellant, Miss Jeny, the judge held that,

         "Her appeal is only possible under Article 8.   I  have  heard  the
         evidence of Miss Miah, who has gone to the length of postponing her
         civil wedding in order that her aunt and cousin might  be  present.
         I find the particular circumstances to be wholly exceptional.  Miss
         Miah and Miss Jeny are very close and keep in touch on  a  frequent
         basis by telephone.  Miss Jeny has never visited her  relatives  in
         England, but Miss Miah has made regular visits  to  Bangladesh.   I
         accept the importance of  close  family  ties,  particularly  at  a
         joyous occasion such as a wedding" (paragraph 18).

    The appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds for the Appellant,  Miss  Jeny.
    The reasoning that the judge gave  at  paragraphs  18  and  19  of  the
    determination were inadequate.  The judge did  not  make  any  findings
    that the Appellant had any family in the UK, which should have been her
    starting point of any consideration.   This  is  because  relationships
    between adults would not necessarily acquire the protection of  Article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention (as was well-established in  the  case
    law).  There was no evidence or finding  of  any  further  elements  of
    dependency which might engage Article 8.  Moreover, it  is  clear  from
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640, that Article  8  assessment  shall  only  be
    carried out when there are compelling circumstances not  recognised  by
    the Rules.  In this case, the Tribunal Judge did not identify any  such
    compelling circumstances and his findings are unsustainable.

 5. On 20th October 2014, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that there was an arguable error of law with  respect  to  the  judge's
    consideration of Article 8.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 17th December 2014, Mr Nath,  appearing  on
    behalf of  the  Respondent  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  submitted  that
    permission to appeal was granted  by  the  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8.  Therefore, we should start by looking at Article  8.   This
    is a high threshold with respect to applications from abroad.  The case
    of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 makes it clear that there  is  a  need  to
    show "compelling circumstances" and the judge  had  not  been  able  to
    identify any.  The determination is essentially limited to findings  at
    paragraph 18 and these are inadequate.  At paragraph 19 the judge  then
    allows the appeal.

 7. For his part, Mr Miah submitted that the judge took the  view  that  he
    did at paragraph 18 in the exercise of his discretion and did  conclude
    that the circumstances here were "wholly exceptional."   Another  judge
    may well have taken a different view.  However, this judge pointed  out
    what these "exceptional" circumstances were by referring  at  paragraph
    19 to the fact that Miss Miah in the United Kingdom "has  gone  to  the
    length of postponing her civil wedding  in  order  that  her  aunt  and
    cousin might be present" (see paragraph 18).   Furthermore,  the  judge
    gave consideration to the wider family and their  Article  8  interests
    because reference was made to the case  of  Beoku-Betts  (at  paragraph
    13).  It was incongruous to allow the appeal of the mother, Lucky,  who
    is the sister of the Sponsor in the UK, but to object to  the  allowing
    of the appeal of the daughter, who was a member of the same family, and
    where both intended to make a family visit together.

 8. In reply, Mr Nath drew my attention to the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    review at Section 3 where he had said that the Appellant did not have a
    "full right of appeal."  Mr Miah properly objected to say that this was
    irrelevant because with respect to appeals based on  race  discrimation
    and human rights grounds, there is an out of country right  of  appeal,
    which is what was being done here.  I accept  that  there  is  a  valid
    appeal before this Tribunal.

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision (see Section  12(2)  of  TCEA  [2007]).   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

10. With out of country appeals with respect to Article 8, there is a  high
    threshold to be met.  The only matters identified by the judge are that
    the wider interests of the family are at stake, by reference to  Beoku-
    Betts (see paragraph 13), and that Miss Miah "has gone to the length of
    postponing her civil wedding in order that her aunt and cousin might be
    present" (paragraph 18).  These  two  circumstances  do  not  point  to
    "wholly exceptional" facts.

11. If it is a case that, "Miss Jeny has never  visited  her  relatives  in
    England" (paragraph 18) that too is not an exceptional fact.

12. Such findings could have been made, but only through a proper  exercise
    of the factual matrix, with Lord Bingham's tabulation being followed in
    Razgar  (at  paragraph  17),  involving  a  five-step  approach.    The
    determination, sensitive as it is in other respects, does  not  display
    this approach.

13. If the appeal was on Article 8 grounds, as it  was,  and  if  what  was
    being considered was not on the basis of a "complete code" then as Lord
    Justice Aikens has made clear in MM (Lebanon) discretion was very  much
    at large, and there had to be consideration of a  range  of  facts  and
    circumstances.  In their absence, I conclude that the judge  fell  into
    error.

Re-Making the Decision

14. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am dismissing this appeal for  the  reasons  given
    above.  This was a case  where,  as  against  the  Appellant's  mother,
    Lucky, who the judge concluded was "in employment, has  a  husband  and
    four other children, two of whom are minors" (16); the position of  the
    Appellant is that she is neither in employment, nor in  education  (see
    paragraph 5).

15. The only contact with her first cousin, whom she saw three  years  ago,
    are conversations by way of telephone, some three or four times a month
    (see paragraph 5).  The fact that the civil wedding has been postponed,
    in order to allow the Appellant to attend,  does  not  reach  the  high
    threshold of Article 8, and neither does the  rights  and  freedoms  of
    family members in the UK (under Beoku-Betts) in this case.

16. If the five-step approach in Razgar is followed, it is clear that, even
    if the Appellant satisfies the first two  requirements,  it  cannot  be
    said that the decision is not in accordance with the law, and it cannot
    be said that it is not  necessary  in  a  democratic  society,  in  the
    interests of the economic wellbeing of the country, and it certainly is
    not  the  case  that  the  interference  is  disproportionate  to   the
    legitimate public end that is sought to be achieved.

17. The maintenance of immigration control  is  very  much  in  the  public
    interest, and given the extent of "family life" rights put  forward  by
    the Appellant, it cannot be said that  the  balance  of  considerations
    falls in her favour and against the state.







Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    dismissed.

19. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 31st December 2014

