






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16908/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House               |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On: 19 February 2015                |               On: 3 March 2015       |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                               Mr Ruhel Ahmed
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          entry clearance officer:
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Rahman, Legal Representative (Jallabad Law
Associates)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 22 March 1981.  His
      application for an entry clearance to visit his brother in the UK  was
      refused by the respondent on 23 July 2013.


   2. In a determination promulgated on 22 October 2014, First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Russell dismissed the appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration
      Rules. The appellant lodged his appeal on 25 November 2013.


   3. It was stated at section B of the application for permission to appeal
      that if the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal  is  outside  the
      UK, the application must be received 28 days after the date  on  which
      he  was  provided  with  written  reasons  for  the   decision.    The
      application was served late.


   4. The reasons given  as to why the application was made late are set out
      at Section B in the application form as follows:


        "due to transitional period of new rules, and  the  fact  that  the
        client is overseas, the duty Judge should allow  the  interests  of
        justice to be met. Therefore, the appellant  seeks  permission  for
        the appeal to be granted despite it being made a couple days out of
        time."


   5. On 9 January  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. There was  in  fact  no  consideration
      given in that decision to the fact that the application  was  received
      out of time.  Nor was any consideration given to the reasons  for  the
      out of time application.


   6. Mr Wilding contended that the application had been made  out  of  time
      and that there had been no decision made to extend  time.  Accordingly
      the application for permission was not in accordance with paragraph 33
      of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
      Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.


   7. It is provided that  where  the  appellant  is  outside  the  U.K.  an
      application to the Tribunal seeking permission to appeal to the  Upper
      Tribunal must be received no later than 28  days  after  the  date  on
      which the party making  the  application  was  provided  with  written
      reasons for the decision.


   8. He submitted that it is clear that time was not extended and  in  fact
      had not even been considered  by  the  Judge  granting  permission  to
      appeal.


   9. Mr Wilding relied on the decision of Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  in
      Boktor and Wanis [2011] UKUT 442  (IAC).  That  decision  was  to  the
      effect that where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has  been
      granted in circumstances where the application is out of time, and  an
      explanation is provided but is not considered by  the  Judge  granting
      permission, in the light  of  AK  (Tribunal  Appeal  -  out  of  time)
      Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the  clear  wording  of  the
      relevant rule, the grant of permission to appeal  is  conditional  and
      the question of whether there  are  special  circumstances  making  it
      unjust not to extend time has to be considered.


  10. In Samir (FtP Permission to Appeal:  Time)[2013]  UKUT  3  (IAC),  the
      Upper Tribunal stated that in a case where following Boktor and Wanis,
      supra, a grant of permission has to be regarded as conditional upon  a
      decision where the time should be extended,  the  latter  decision  is
      part of the original decision on the application. If  the  application
      was to the First-tier Tribunal, the decision as to time  is  therefore
      made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  if  the  application  is  not
      admitted, there is the possibility of renewal to the Upper Tribunal.


  11. Mr Wilding submitted that two reasons were given as to why  permission
      was late. One related to the transitional period of the new rules  and
      the other the fact that the appellant is overseas.


  12. He submitted that no change with  regard  to  time  periods  had  been
      effected  under  the  2014  Rules.  It  is  common  ground  that   the
      application was submitted 2-3 days late. Accordingly, the  application
      itself accepts that it has been made out of time and no other  reasons
      are given.


  13. In the circumstances, he submitted that  there  is  no  proper  reason
      disclosed to  extend  time.  The  deadline  for  the  lodging  of  the
      application, namely 28 days, "was ample." The procedure rules envisage
      people appealing from abroad. Hence, 28 days is given.


  14. Accordingly, the appellant has  not  established  or  shown  any  good
      reason to extend time. He submitted that there must be a  finality  of
      decision making. The appellant has a remedy  to  apply  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.


  15. Mr Rahman submitted that it is correct that the application was lodged
      out of time. He submitted that under the 2005 Rules, the appellant was
      entitled to have 56 days for lodging an appeal.


  16. Further, 'the client is  overseas'.  Promulgation  took  place  on  22
      October 2014. The rules changed two days prior to  that.  Accordingly,
      "you are entitled to allow a couple of days out of time."


  17. During the course of his submissions, Mr Rahman confirmed that he  had
      represented  the  appellant  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. He stated that on receipt of the decision he had to read the
      rules. There were telephone calls between the appellant and his  firm.
      The appellant was aware that his appeal had     been dismissed. He had
      given  instructions  to  apply  for  permission  to  appeal.  In   the
      circumstances, he submitted that a satisfactory explanation  had  been
      given for the exercise of discretion to extend the time period.


  18. In reply, Mr Wilding submitted that 28 days was the  relevant  period,
      not 56 days. The notice itself informed the appellant that he only had
      28  days.  He  referred  to  the  Asylum  and   Immigration   Tribunal
      (Procedure) Rules 2005 which provided at paragraph 24(3) that where an
      appellant is outside the UK, the time  limit  for  sending  a  written
      application for permission to appeal is 28 days.


     Assessment


  19.  It  is  evident  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  granted
      permission did not make a decision or give  any  consideration  as  to
      whether or not it was appropriate to grant an extension of time in the
      circumstances, despite the fact that it was accepted and noted in  the
      application for permission itself that it was out of time.


  20. There was no suggestion that there had been an implicit  extension  of
      time. There is accordingly no evidence that the  Judge  exercised  any
      discretion involved in extending time.


  21. I have had regard to the two reasons given by  Mr  Rahman.  There  has
      been no attempt to provide any further evidence or  make  any  further
      submissions beyond the contention that the application  was  submitted
      late "due to transitional period of new rules." That contention has no
      merit. The application itself expressly pointed out that  it  must  be
      received 28 days after the date on which the reasons for the  decision
      were provided. It is accepted that the date was 22 October 2014.


  22. In any event, the 2014 Rules do not substantially differ from the 2005
      Rules with regard to the 28 day time period. Mr Rahman has stated that
      there  were  several  telephone  calls  between  his  office  and  the
      appellant. The appellant was aware that his appeal had been dismissed.
      Mr Rahman had been instructed on  his  behalf  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  It  appears  that  his  instructions  continued  after  the
      appellant's decision was refused.


  23. There has been no explanation given as to why  the  application  could
      not have been lodged well  within  the  28  day  period.  It  was  the
      solicitor himself who filed the form on behalf of the appellant. It is
      also signed by the solicitor.


  24.  In  the  circumstances,  I  do  not  find  that  the  delay  by   his
      representatives  in   these   circumstances   constitutes   a   proper
      explanation for the  lateness  of  the  notice.  Apart  from  the  two
      assertions made in the application for  permission  itself  there  has
      been  no  evidence  produced  explaining  the  delay,  either  by  the
      appellant or his representatives as to why the application  could  not
      have been prepared well before the expiry  of  28  days.  I  have  had
      regard to the consequences of the decision and the  prejudice  to  the
      appellant. Taking all these matters as a whole,  I  am  not  satisfied
      that by reason of special circumstances, it would  be  unjust  not  to
      extend time.


          Decision


         The time for applying to the First-tier Tribunal for permission  to
appeal is not              extended.  The application is not admitted.


         No anonymity direction is made.


         Signed            Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Mailer       Dated:
1 March 2015




