
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16955/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  8th October 2014                            |On 14th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - WARSAW
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        MS ABIODUN ABISOLA OGUBNYANWO

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Asomaning, Legal Representative

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against the decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal (Judge Cheales) to allow the appeal against the decision to
   refuse the respondent's application for entry  clearance  to  the  United
   Kingdom  in  order  to  visit  her  uncle,  Mr  Wala  Olujimi   Ogunyanwo
   (hereafter, "the sponsor").

2. The First-tier Tribunal did not specify the ground under  Section  84  of
   the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  upon  which  it  had
   allowed the  appeal.  This  in  itself  was  an  error  of  law,  if  not
   necessarily a material one. The need to specify the ground upon which the
   appeal had been allowed was of  particular  importance  in  this  appeal,
   because the Tribunal's jurisdiction was restricted to allowing the appeal
   on grounds that either the decision was discriminatory  or  contrary  the
   appellant's rights under the 1950 European Convention for the  Protection
   of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms  [see  The  Immigration  Appeals
   (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 (SI No 1532) which came into effect  on
   the 9th July 2012, a matter of days before the  date  of  the  decision].
   This meant that the appeal was unable to succeed,  for  example,  on  the
   ground that the decision had not been  "in  accordance  with  immigration
   rules".

3. The failure to specify the ground upon which  the  Tribunal  allowed  the
   appeal, has permitted Mr Asomaning to  argue  that  was  allowed  on  the
   ground that the decision was incompatible with  the  respondent's  rights
   under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  for  the  Protection  of
   Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. To this end, he prayed in aid  the
   final sentence of paragraph 4 of  the  determination.  This  reads:  "The
   decision is a disproportionate interference with her  [the  respondent's]
   Article 8 rights". However, it is obvious from the context  within  which
   that  sentence  appears,  that  the  judge  was  merely  summarising  the
   appellant's grounds of appeal, rather  than  making  a  finding  to  that
   effect. The real clue as to the basis upon which the appeal was  allowed,
   lies within the last sentence of paragraph 9. This reads: "I am satisfied
   that this is a genuine visit  and  that  the  Appellant  will  return  to
   Ukraine at the end of the visit, and the appeal  is  allowed".  This  can
   only sensibly be interpreted as a finding that the appellant's intentions
   were compatible with the requirements of paragraph 41 of the  Immigration
   Rules. As the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to allow the  appeal  on
   that basis, it follows that the decision must be set aside and the appeal
   determined afresh.

4. Having indicated my decision to set aside the decision of the  First-tier
   Tribunal, I heard submissions from each  of  the  representatives  as  to
   whether the appeal should be allowed on the ground that the decision  was
   incompatible with the respondent's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
   family life under Article 8 of  the  1950  European  Convention  for  the
   Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

5. Mr Asomaning submitted that the evidence demonstrated  that  the  sponsor
   was  financially  supporting  the  respondent  in  her  studies  at   her
   university in Crimea. I am satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that
   this is correct. I am also satisfied, to  the  same  standard,  that  the
   respondent has a particularly close  emotional  bond  with  the  sponsor.
   However, this  is  not  to  suggest  that  she  does  not  also  have  an
   emotionally close bond with her parents, who reside in Nigeria.

6. However, I am not satisfied that any of  the  above  constitutes  'family
   life'. The respondent is an adult. Whilst  she  is  not  yet  financially
   independent, she nevertheless does not live with either  the  sponsor  or
   her parents. Therefore, for all practical  purposes,  she  is  living  an
   independent life.

7. Even had I found the existence of family life, however, the fact  remains
   that Article 8 does not impose a  general  obligation  upon  a  State  to
   respect a family member's choice  of  residence.  Whilst  the  respondent
   would obviously prefer to visit her uncle in the United Kingdom  (as  she
   has in the past) there is nothing to prevent him  from  visiting  her  in
   either Crimea or in her country  of  nationality  (Nigeria).  Neither  is
   there anything to prevent the respondent from making a fresh  application
   to visit  the  sponsor  in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  am  not  satisfied,
   therefore, that the decision engaged the potential operation  of  Article
   8.

8. However, even if the potential operation of Article had been  engaged,  I
   would have been satisfied (for  the  reasons  set  out  above)  that  the
   decision was lawful and proportionate in furtherance of the economic well
   being of the country through the consistent  application  of  immigration
   controls.

Decision

9. The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is allowed.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal against  the
   refusal of entry clearance is set aside, and is substituted by a decision
   to dismiss that appeal.

Anonymity not directed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

