

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16114/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House, Newport          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On:              22 October 2014              |On:         24 October 2014  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                         ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MOSCOW

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ALEKSANDRA ITCKINA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL

   1. This is the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal against the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly in which he allowed the  appeal  of
      the Respondent (referred to hereafter as "Miss Itckina"), a citizen of
      Russia  born  on  10  December  2010,  against  the  decision  of  the
      Respondent dated 11 June 2013 to refuse entry clearance  as  a  family
      visitor.


   2. Miss Itckina's appeal came for hearing on papers on 5 February 2014
      along with the appeals of her parents Sergey Vladimirovich Itchkin
      (VA/16112/2013) and Leonora Tsvetkova (VA/16113/2013). All three
      appeals were based upon the same facts and were allowed. The Entry
      Clearance Officer applied for permission to appeal only in respect of
      the decision to allow Miss Itckina's appeal. Permission was granted by
      Designated Judge McCarthy on 27 May 2014.

   3. The simple basis of the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is that
      whereas Miss Itckina's parents had a full right of appeal under the
      Family Visitor regulations because the person the family proposed to
      visit was Mr Itckin's sister (and therefore Mrs Tsvetkova's sister-in-
      law) she was Miss Itckina's aunt and therefore the refusal in her case
      did not attract a full right of appeal.

   4. It may be thought that the person drafting the appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal could be considered over-zealous in raising an issue such as
      this seeking to prevent a 5 year old child travelling with her parents
      particularly, as pointed out in the grant of permission to appeal,
      this issue had not been raised previously.

   5. In any event at the hearing before me Mr Richards on behalf of the
      Respondent said that it appeared from his file that the Entry
      Clearance Officer had relented and entry clearance had been issued to
      the Appellant. On this basis, the decision under appeal to the First-
      tier Tribunal having seemingly been withdrawn by the Entry Clearance
      officer and entry clearance granted Mr Richards sought leave to
      withdraw the appeal to the Upper Tribunal. In accordance with rule
      17(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I consent
      to this withdrawal.


   Summary




   6.     Appeal to the Upper Tribunal withdrawn by the Appellant.










   J F W Phillips
   Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal    Date: 24 October 2014


