
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/17582/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On May 13, 2015                      |On May 19, 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MOHAMMAD ABDUL AWAL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)
    For the Respondent:     Miss Hashmi (Legal Representative)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh. He made  an  application  for
    entry clearance as a family visitor to visit his brother  on  June  25,
    2013. His application was refused on July 27, 2013  and  his  right  of
    appeal was restricted to the grounds set out in Section 84(1)(c) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on September 5, 2013 under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 arguing  that
    refusing his application was a breach of article 8 ECHR.

 4. The appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Birrell
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on  May  16,  2014,  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on May 28, 2015 she  allowed  his  appeal  on  the
    basis a refusal would breach the brothers' right to family life.

 5. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on January 21, 2015  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred. The decision had only been received on  January  9,
    2015 as it was sent to the  wrong  address  by  the  Court,  in  error.
    Permission to appeal (including a direction the appeal was in time) was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parkes  on  the  basis  the
    FtTJ erred in her approach to family life between siblings.

 6. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The sponsor was in attendance.

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I see no reason to alter that order

SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR IN LAW

 8. Mr Harrison relied on the grounds of appeal and simply argued that  the
    FtTJ had materially erred by finding family life existed between mature
    siblings who had not seen each other since 2012.

 9. Miss Hashmi submitted the decision taken by the FtTJ was open  to  her.
    The FtTJ was fully aware of the appellant's brother's medical condition
    and the papers also revealed that there was some  financial  dependency
    between the appellant and sponsor as evidenced in the sponsor's answers
    to questions put to him by the respondent in a telephone interview. The
    appellant's brother had regularly visited  his  family,  including  the
    appellant, for a number of years and  it  was  only  his  recent  renal
    problems that prevented him travelling. The decision should be upheld.

CONSIDERATION AND FINDING ON MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

10. The appellant, aged 39, wanted to visit  his  elder  brother,  aged  69
    years of age. The respondent found he  did  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules refusing it for not satisfying paragraph 41(i), (ii)  and  (vii).
    The appellant appealed this decision but due to the restrictive  nature
    of the right of appeal his appeal rights  were  limited  to  article  8
    ECHR.

11. The FtTJ considered the evidence as she had  to  because  any  decision
    under article 8 includes a consideration  of  whether  the  Immigration
    rules were satisfied. In unchallenged  findings  she  found  it  was  a
    genuine visit, he had a wife and children remaining in  Bangladesh  and
    the sponsor would bear the cost of some of his travel  expenses.  I  am
    satisfied that if she had been able to  allow  this  appeal  under  the
    rules she would have done so.

12. However, in order for the appellant to succeed he  had  to  demonstrate
    that family or private life between him and his brother  existed  in  a
    article 8 sense. The mere fact they were related was not sufficient and
    the  FtTJ  found  the  appellant's  brother's  medical  condition   was
    sufficient to bring article 8 into play.

13. Mr Harrison's submission is simple namely the FtTJ because  she  failed
    to consider the first question that is set out in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    00027. Lord Bingham stated that  the  first  test  the  appellant  must
    satisfy in any article 8 claim is whether there is  family  or  private
    life.

14. The FtTJ considered his article  8  claim  in  paragraph  [17]  of  her
    determination. I do not recite her paragraph verbatim but  I  have  set
    out below the essential parts of that paragraph-

         "In relation to the ... appellant he wishes to see  his  brother...
         In this case I accept that he enjoys and is entitled to respect for
         family life in the form of visits with his brother. I  accept  that
         ... is in very poor health... I accept that he is unable to  travel
         and therefore the refusal of entry clearance would  interfere  with
         his right to see his brother. ..."

15. In granting permission to appeal the judge referred to the decisions of
    Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170 and Ghising (family  life  -  adults  -
    Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC). I have also had regard  to  the
    decision of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  00112
    (IAC).

16. In Kugathas the Court of Appeal stated  that,  in  order  to  establish
    family life, it is necessary to show that there is a real committed  or
    effective support or relationship between the family  members  and  the
    normal emotional ties between a mother and  an  adult  son  would  not,
    without more, be enough.

17. In Ghising the  Tribunal  said  that  a  review  of  the  jurisprudence
    discloses that there is no general proposition that Article 8 can never
    be engaged when the family life it is sought to  establish  is  between
    adult siblings living together. Rather than  applying  a  blanket  rule
    with regard to adult children, each case should be analysed on its  own
    facts, to decide whether or not family life exists, within the  meaning
    of Article 8(1).

18. In Mostafa the President of the Tribunal stated in article 8 claims the
    claimant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules is not the question
    to be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of  being  a  weighty,
    though not determinative, factor when deciding whether such refusal  is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.

19. The fact the appellant would have met the Rules is an important  factor
    when  considering  proportionality  but   before   proportionality   is
    considered there are a number  of  other  questions  that  have  to  be
    satisfied and the most important one in  this  appeal  was  the  actual
    issue of family/private life itself.

20. The Tribunal made clear in Ghising that each case has to be  considered
    on its merits but the Court of Appeal in Kugathas emphasised  that  the
    parties have to show  some  dependency  that  goes  beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties of siblings.

21. This appeal concerned siblings who had lived apart for many years. Miss
    Hashmi argued there  was  evidence  of  dependency  but  that  possibly
    between the appellant and the  sponsor.  The  FtTJ  did  not  find  any
    dependency between them so I find that no merit in  that  part  of  her
    submission. She further argued that the appellant's brother had visited
    him in Bangladesh but this  contact  does  not  demonstrate  dependency
    especially when the appellant's case is that he has his own  family  in
    Bangladesh and he intends to return.

22. This FtTJ found the appeal should be allowed because the brother  would
    be unable to travel but this does not demonstrate a dependency.  It  is
    evidence of interference but under Razgar the issue of interference  is
    only considered once family/private life has been established.

23. Whilst the appellant, his brother and the sponsor are clearly family  I
    am satisfied the FtTJ erred in finding their circumstances amounted  to
    family life. The appellant's brother's  condition  does  not  make  him
    dependent on the appellant because the housing report provided confirms
    that he lives with his wife, the sponsor and  his  wife.  There  is  no
    financial support forthcoming from the appellant as  evidenced  by  the
    fact the sponsor helps the appellant.

24. The FtTJ has considered the questions  in  Razgar  but  overlooked  the
    first question and for that reason she erred in law.

25. I indicated to the parties that if there was a material error then  the
    only proper decision I could reach would be to dismiss the  appellant's
    appeal on human rights grounds.

DECISION

26. There was a material error.  I  allow  the  appeal  and  I  remake  the
    decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.



Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I reverse the fee award made as the respondent's appeal has succeeded.



Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
