


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17683/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 6 August 2015                      |                On 14 August 2015    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                               MD KHOSRU MIAH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Dhaka

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal O'Garro, who in a determination promulgated on 21 August 2014,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  to
    grant him entry clearance as a family visitor. The initial  application
    to enter the United Kingdom as a family visitor was made as long ago as
    25 April 2011.  That  application  was  refused  but  was  successfully
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on 12 February 2013.

2.   Given the significant delay the respondent wished to confirm  that  the
    principal sponsor, Mr Choudhury, who was described as  the  appellant's
    mother's sister's son (his maternal first cousin) was still willing  to
    act as sponsor to the appellant. To this end the  respondent  contacted
    Mr Choudhury on 25 March 2013. It is unclear to me,  as  it  is  to  Mr
    Duffy who represents the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, what telephone number was used by the respondent to initially
    contact Mr Choudhury.  The  individual  to  whom  the  entry  clearance
    assistant spoke purported to be Mr Choudhury and claimed  that  he  did
    not know the appellant.

3.   Following this conversation the person  claiming  to  be  Mr  Choudhury
    sent a handwritten letter, dated 03 May 2013, to  the  respondent.  The
    author of this letter confirmed his conversation with the British  High
    Commission and reiterated that he  did  not  know  the  appellant.  The
    letter claimed the appellant was cheating by using Mr Choudhury's  name
    as a sponsor. The handwritten letter gave the correct  address  for  Mr
    Choudhury as identified in the application form. The letter also gave a
    (different) mobile and landline telephone number and an  email  address
    that was similar although not identical to Mr Choudhury's full name.

4.   On 6 June 2013 the entry clearance assistant telephoned the person  who
    had identified themselves as  Mr  Choudhury.  In  an  interview  record
    provided by the respondent the individual confirmed  his  identity  and
    asked whether the British High Commission had received the  handwritten
    letter. The person purporting to be Mr Choudhury once  again  confirmed
    that he did not know the appellant. This information was  assembled  in
    the form of a Document Verification  Report  and  the  application  was
    refused on the  basis  that  false  representations  had  been  with  a
    specific reference to paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   Grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  indicated  that  the
    appellant would be producing supporting  evidence  including  documents
    relating to his mother's marriage, land deeds, details relating  to  Mr
    Choudhury's mother's marriage and several birth certificates. When  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Judge she indicated that she  had  no
    additional evidence. Nothing it seems had been produced to her over and
    above the bare denials that were contained in the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Based on the evidence before her the judge was satisfied that the false
    representations had been made out and dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

6.   The grounds of appeal contend that a 58 page bundle had  in  fact  been
    provided to the First-tier Tribunal but that, for whatever  reason,  it
    had not been considered by the judge. This  bundle  included  a  letter
    purportedly from Mr Choudhury confirming his willingness to sponsor the
    appellant and indicating that he had not received  any  telephone  call
    from the British High  Commission.  Also  included  in  the  bundle  of
    documents was a document said to be Mr Choudhury's birth certificate, a
    nikah namah relating to Mr Choudhury's parents' marriage, a nikah namah
    relating to the appellant's parents' marriage,  and  some  land  deeds.
    There was a date  stamp  on  the  covering  letter  from  Hatton  Cross
    indicating it had been received on 6 August 2014.  This  was  two  days
    before the appeal was considered by the First-tier Judge.

Discussion

7.   Having carefully considered this  bundle,  and  having  regard  to  the
    Hatton Cross date stamp, I am entirely satisfied that, through no fault
    of her own, the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  have  before  her  the
    evidence identified in the grounds of appeal, specifically, the 58 page
    bundle.

8.   Following the authorities of MM (Unfairness:  E&R)  Sudan  [2014]  UKUT
    00105 (IAC)  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    procedural error in terms of the availability of evidence.  The  First-
    tier Judge made a mistake of fact as to the  availability  of  evidence
    when in fact it is clear that that  evidence  was  available.  I  again
    emphasise that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was in no way at fault  in
    failing to consider evidence that was not made available to her and her
    determination was otherwise unimpeachable.

8.   The failure to put the appellant's bundle before the Judge has  however
    rendered her decision unsafe. In circumstances where the appellant  was
    effectively deprived of a fair hearing  because  the  large  bundle  of
    documents in support of his appeal  were  not  made  available  to  the
    judge, I am satisfied this is an appropriate case to be  remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to enable full consideration to be given  to
    the documents he has produced and to any oral evidence  that  may  come
    from witnesses.


Notice of Decision and Directions

The First-tier Tribunal determination was infected by a  material  error  of
law.

The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal a  Judge  other  than
Judge O'Garro for full consideration to be given to the  documents  produced
by the appellant and to any supporting oral evidence.

I further direct that the respondent disclose, by means  of  a  section  108
application if necessary (of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002), the telephone number initially used to contact Mr Choudhury, and  how
that number was first obtained.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date



Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

