
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17246/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Birmingham Employment Centre|Determination Promulgated     |
|On 13th March 2015                            |On 25th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                        ms Moymuna Khatun Kolsum Bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - dhaka
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tony Muman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge T Thorne, promulgated on 10th June 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Nottingham on 28th May 2014.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the  appeal  of  Ms  Moymuna  Khatun  Kolsum   Bibi.    The   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on 4th
    June 1942.  She appealed against the refusal of entry clearance for the
    purposes of making a three week visit to see  her  son,  Mr  Abu  Saleh
    Sattar, in the UK under paragraph 41 of HC 395,  in  a  decision  dated
    11th November 2010.  This decision letter states that,

         "I note that you made an application for entry  clearance  on  16th
         May 2006.  This was refused on 17th May 2006.  You have  failed  to
         disclose this on your application form.  I also note that  in  2006
         you gave your mother's name as Saleha Begum.  On this occasion your
         passport states that your mother is Mulluk Chan Bibi.  Your current
         passport was issued on 29th June 2010.  I  am  therefore  satisfied
         that you have withheld a fact material to your application and have
         used deception in an attempt to disguise your previous refusal.  As
         such I have refused your application under paragraph 320(7A) of the
         Immigration Rules."

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge recorded evidence from Mr Abu Saleh Sattar,  the  Appellant's
    sponsoring son in the UK, who "explained that  the  Appellant's  mother
    was (supposedly like many people in Bangladesh)  known  by  two  names.
    She was called both Mulluk Chan Bibi and as  Saleha  Begum"  (paragraph
    21).

 4. The judge held, however, that the  Appellant  had  never  appealed  the
    previous refusals,  which  were  based  upon  the  Appellant's  alleged
    deception, and therefore they must implicitly amount to  a  recognition
    and acceptance by the Appellant that she had indeed set out to deceive.
     But more importantly, the judge also held that,

         "In 2010 the ECO made clear and unambiguous allegations  that  the
         Appellant had committed a deception by not declaring  the  previous
         refusal of her previous application.  I have seen  no  evidence  to
         rebut the allegation  that  you  failed  to  declare  the  previous
         refusal.  I have seen no witness statement from  her  denying  that
         she failed to make such a declaration and the Sponsor is not  in  a
         position to deny it either.  In those circumstances I am  satisfied
         that it has been proved to  the  standard  required  that  no  such
         declaration was made." (Paragraph 28)

 5. The judge held that the requirements of deception  as  set  out  in  AA
    (Nigeria) were satisfied.  The judge did then go on, independently,  to
    consider paragraph 41 (from paragraphs 30  to  34)  and  dismissed  the
    appeal on this basis as well.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application  state  that  the  fact  that  the  previous
    refusals were not  appealed  does  not  mean  that  the  Appellant  had
    accepted the alleged deception having been made by her.

 7. On 15th December 2014, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that the failure to challenge a previous allegation could not amount to
    an acceptance of that for the purposes of paragraph 320.  Moreover, the
    Tribunal also came to an irrational conclusion if  you  took  the  view
    that there were no declarations made by either  the  Appellant  or  her
    sponsoring  son  in  the  UK  to  depart  from  what  was  being  said.
    Furthermore,  the  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into  account   material
    evidence, from  Abu  Saleh  Sattar,  about  the  reasons  for  the  two
    different names.  If the Tribunal's findings in relation to  the  issue
    of deception were flawed, then these  arguably  affected  the  separate
    findings that the Tribunal made from paragraph 30 onwards  in  relation
    to paragraph 41 of HC 395.

 8. A Rule 24 response was entered  on  8th  January  2015,  where  it  was
    accepted that the Tribunal had plainly been wrong in stating  that  the
    failure to challenge previous decisions amounted to  an  acceptance  of
    those decisions.  Nevertheless, the fact  that  the  Appellant  was  72
    years old, a widow, and lived in a house not owned by her, entitled the
    judge to come to the conclusions that he did.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 13th March 2015, Mr David Mills,  appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent, stated that he would have to accept that a
    failure  to  challenge  a  previous  decision  did  not  amount  to  an
    acceptance of deception given what was said under paragraph  320(a)  of
    HC  395.   The  problem,  submitted  Mr  Mills,  was  that  this   2010
    application was not on file.  It was not before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and it was not before the Upper Tribunal today  either.   It  was
    probably somewhere online.  If an adjournment could be granted, then it
    could probably be traced.

10. Second, however, Mr Mills also wisely accepted, that even in the  event
    of this 2010 application being traced, it was  unlikely  that,  without
    clear intention to deceive the authorities, the  burden  of  which  lay
    upon the Respondent authority, the Appellant could not be  said  to  be
    guilty of exercising deception.

11. For his  part,  Mr  Muman  submitted  that  he  could  not  accept  the
    application for an adjournment.  This is because on 10th June  2013  an
    application was filed.  There were two further  hearings.   The  second
    hearing came up  before  Judge  Thorne.   He  did  not  have  the  2010
    application.  The Home Office had notice of the appeal.  The  Appellant
    expected the 2010 application to have been produced today.  His primary
    witness, Mr Abu Saleh Sattar, ran a dental practice, and  it  was  very
    difficult for him to take time out to attend hearings,  and  it  simply
    was not acceptable to adjourn on an issue  that  was  relevant  to  the
    Respondent authority.

12. Mr Muman referred to his latest six page bundle,  which  sets  out  the
    nature of the alleged deception, because there are three refusals.  The
    first refusal was in 2005, the second refusal was on 17th May 2006, and
    the third refusal was on 11th November 2010.  There was  nothing  there
    that could be said to indicate that the Appellant was  proven  to  have
    exercised deception.  The alleged deception, in  any  event,  is  based
    upon confusion over the use of two names, that of Saleha Begum and that
    of Mulluk Chan Bibi.  The Appellant's  son  had  given  an  explanation
    before Judge Thorne, and if that explanation was not accepted,  it  was
    for the Respondent authority to show that  there  was  deception.   For
    today, the Appellant herself had furnished an affidavit to explain that
    the use of two names  in  this  way  was  entirely  plausible  and  the
    affidavit came from Bangladesh.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  The error of law is clear for reasons given in the grant  of
    permission.  Both paragraph 27 and paragraph 28 are misconceived in the
    determination.  At  paragraph  27,  the  judge  states  that  the  2010
    decision was never appealed and that "in those circumstances I conclude
    that the Appellant cannot go  behind  the  decision  and  seek  to  re-
    litigate the finding by the ECO that  deception  was  used"  (paragraph
    27).

14. Even the Rule 24  response  accepts  this  to  be  plainly  wrong.   At
    paragraph 28, it  is  said  that  "in  2010  the  ECO  made  clear  and
    unambiguous allegations that the Appellant had committed a deception by
    not  declaring  the  previous  refusal  of  a   previous   application"
    (paragraph 28).

15. It is, however, under AA (Nigeria), for  the  Respondent  authority  to
    show how this amounted to a deception that was deliberate and intended.
     This has not been done.  There is no reason why the explanation  given
    with respect to the use of two  names  is  not,  on  the  face  of  it,
    entirely plausible.

Remaking the Decision

16. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the evidence and submissions that I
    have heard today.  The evidence that I heard  today  was  from  Mr  Abu
    Saleh Sattar, who adopted his witness statement of 23rd April 2013  and
    of 23rd May  2014  (see  pages  1  to  3).   In  cross-examination,  he
    explained that the purpose of his mother's visit to the UK  is  to  see
    his grandchildren because he and his wife are both working full-time in
    the dental practice and it is not easy for them to  go  and  visit  the
    mother there.

17. As to her position  in  Bangladesh,  he  explained  that  she  had  two
    brothers and three sisters living around her.  She was in good  health.
    He would not want her to remain in the UK any longer than was necessary
    because he knows that he would not be able to provide her with  day-to-
    day care, in the way that she has in Bangladesh because both he and his
    wife work.  He explained that he had actually built up  his  own  home,
    which was a three-storey building, in  Bangladesh  in  1996,  with  the
    works extending into 2003.  It is in this house that his mother  lives.
    She attends to the house.  It is important for the  Appellant  to  have
    his mother living there where she stays in luxury.

18. In re-examination he explained that he has a cook who comes  and  cooks
    for her, and she has a maid that cleans the house.  He  also  explained
    that his mother had a large number of brothers and sisters all of  whom
    live in the area and control much of the village life where she  lives.
    He was absolutely categorical that she would not want to stay,  was  in
    good health, and was not going to allege a change of circumstance after
    arrival here, because she had to return back to  Bangladesh.   He  said
    that she had been widow for fifteen years but it  was  only  from  2005
    that she had first attempted to come to the UK to visit her  son.   She
    would return.  It was important for her to return.  On this basis, I am
    satisfied that this is both a genuine visit and a visit for  a  genuine
    purpose and that the  requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  HC  395  are
    satisfied.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

20. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    23rd March 2015

