
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: va/18270/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th November 2014                           |On 8th December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Irfan Mohammad Irfan
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No legal representation

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against  a  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Quigley promulgated on 30th June 2014.



 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a male citizen of Pakistan born  23rd  March  1975  who
    applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a family  visitor.
    He wished to visit his cousin Raja Babar Nawaz to whom I shall refer as
    the Sponsor, for a period of six weeks.

 4. The application was refused on 3rd  September  2013  the  ECO  refusing
    entry clearance with reference  to  paragraph  320(7A),  and  paragraph
    41(i) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules.  The ECO  contended  that  the
    claimant had submitted a false document, and did not accept that he was
    genuinely seeking entry as a visitor or that he intended to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

 5. The claimant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  decision  was
    reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager and it was accepted the claimant
    had not submitted a false document.  Therefore the ECO no longer relied
    upon paragraph 320(7A) but maintained the refusal under paragraph 41(i)
    and (ii).  The claimant had referred to human rights in his Grounds  of
    Appeal and the Entry Clearance Manager did not accept refusal of  entry
    clearance breached Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on  Human
    Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 6. The appeal was decided by Judge Quigley on the papers without  an  oral
    hearing on 16th June 2014.  The judge noted that the claimant had  only
    a limited right of appeal against refusal of entry clearance, and  that
    the only right of appeal available to the claimant was  the  contention
    that the ECO's decision was unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 as being incompatible with  the  claimant's  Convention
    rights.

 7. The judge however went on to allow the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules,  and  although  he  did  not  consider  human  rights   in   the
    determination, indicated that the appeal  was  also  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds as the ECO's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law.

 8. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    summary it was contended that the  judge  had  erred  in  allowing  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules, and had not at  any  point  in  the
    determination identified what, if any, human rights issue  was  engaged
    in  the  appeal.   Therefore  it  was  contended  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal De
    Haney who found the grounds arguable.

10. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

11. The Sponsor attended the hearing on behalf of the claimant although  he
    had not been appointed as a representative.  The Sponsor spoke with the
    assistance of an interpreter in Urdu and I was satisfied that there was
    no difficulty in communication.

12. The  Sponsor  confirmed  that  he  had  seen  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination, and the grounds seeking permission to  appeal,  and  the
    grant of permission.  He indicated that he understood that the  initial
    purpose of this hearing was to establish whether or not the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law.  I  explained  to  him  that  I  would  hear
    submissions from Mr Mills on behalf of the ECO, and then afford him the
    opportunity of making any representations that he thought appropriate.

13. Mr Mills relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to appeal pointing out that although  the  judge  recognised
    that there was a limited right of appeal, the judge had not  considered
    human rights but had considered the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    when he did not have the jurisdiction to do so.

14. The Sponsor indicated that he understood the  submissions  made  by  Mr
    Mills, which I nevertheless explained to him.   The  Sponsor  indicated
    that he did not wish to say anything in response, as to whether or  not
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.

15. I decided that the First-tier Tribunal determination must be set  aside
    because of a material error of law.

16. There was a limited right of appeal open to the claimant,  because  his
    application for entry clearance had been made after 25th June 2013 when
    section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act  2013  came  into  force,  which
    restricted appeal rights to grounds relating to  racial  discrimination
    or breach of human rights, when appealing  decisions  to  refuse  entry
    clearance as a visitor.

17. The claimant had raised human rights in his Grounds of Appeal, but  the
    judge considered and allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and
    therefore exceeded his jurisdiction.  The error  was  material  because
    the judge did not consider the issue of human rights.

18. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  with  no
    findings preserved.

Re-making the Decision

19. Both the Sponsor and Mr Mills indicated that they were ready to proceed
    so that  the  decision  could  be  re-made.   I  decided  that  it  was
    appropriate to proceed and re-make the decision rather  than  remit  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, having considered Practice  Statement  7.2  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statement.

20. Mr  Mills  indicated  that  he  had  nothing  further  to  add  to  the
    submissions that he had made in relation to error of law, and contended
    that the appeal must be dismissed.

21. The Sponsor stated that the claimant was a genuine visitor  who  simply
    wished to come to the  United  Kingdom  to  meet  his  relatives.   The
    Sponsor stated that there was no doubt about the claimant's  intentions
    and he said  that  there  was  no  reason  why  the  appeal  should  be
    restricted to human rights.  The Sponsor indicated  that  the  claimant
    had produced all  documents  and  given  an  accurate  account  of  his
    circumstances and therefore the appeal should be allowed.  The  Sponsor
    confirmed that he visited the claimant in Pakistan.

22. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

23. Although the claimant has mentioned human rights in paragraph 15(xviii)
    of his appeal he has simply referred to section 6 of the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998, and has not adequately explained which of his human rights he
    claims have been breached by refusal of entry clearance.   In  my  view
    the claimant must be relying upon Article  8  of  the  1950  Convention
    which I set out below;

    (1)  Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence.
    (2)  There shall be no interference by  a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.

24. As this is an  appeal  against  refusal  of  entry  clearance,  I  must
    consider the circumstances appertaining at the date  of  refusal,  that
    being 3rd September 2013.  In considering Article 8 I have followed the
    five stage approach advocated by the House of Lords  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL  27  which  indicates  that  the  following  questions  should  be
    considered;

    (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?
    (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
    (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
    (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?
    (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
         end sought to be achieved?"

25. Although the Razgar guidelines relate to a removal case, I am satisfied
    that they can apply to an entry clearance application.  The  burden  of
    proof is on the appellant to show that he has established a  family  or
    private  life  and  that  refusal  of  entry  clearance  would  be   an
    interference with his right to respect for that private or family life.



26. I do not find that the claimant has established  any  form  of  private
    life in the United Kingdom.  His private life is in Pakistan.  I do not
    find that the claimant has established a family life with  the  Sponsor
    or any of his other relatives in the United Kingdom.  I have taken into
    account all of the documentation submitted on behalf of the claimant.

27. In relation to family life with the Sponsor, the claimant  and  Sponsor
    do not live together.  They are both adults and they  live  with  their
    own family members who are resident in Pakistan and the United  Kingdom
    respectively.  The Court of Appeal decided in Kugathas [2003] EWCA  Civ
    31 at paragraph 25 that family life is not established between an adult
    child and his surviving parent or other siblings unless something  more
    exists than normal emotional ties.  In  this  case,  the  claimant  and
    Sponsor are not related as parents or siblings, they are cousins.  They
    are not dependent upon each other and they have not established  family
    life that would engage Article 8.  In making this finding I  take  into
    account paragraph 28 of AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801  in  which  it
    was stated;

    It follows, in our judgment, that while an interference with private or
    family life must be real if it is to engage Art.8(1), the threshold  of
    engagement (the 'minimum level') is not a specially high one.

28. As I have found that the claimant  has  not  established  a  family  or
    private life that would engage Article 8, there is no need  for  me  to
    consider the third, fourth and fifth questions set out in Razgar.

29. The claimant also mentioned discrimination in the grounds of appeal  in
    paragraph 15(xix) stating that the ECO's decision  was  discriminatory.
    The claimant did not go on to give any satisfactory reasons as  to  why
    it was contended that the decision was discriminatory or in what way it
    was discriminatory.

30. Having considered all the evidence submitted by the claimant, I find no
    evidence of discrimination  in  the  decision.   The  ECO  applied  the
    Immigration Rules and concluded that paragraph 41 was not satisfied and
    gave reasons for that  finding.   Parliament  has  decided  that  there
    should be no full right of appeal against a decision such as this,  and
    while I understand that the claimant feels unhappy at  not  having  his
    case considered by an independent Tribunal, I am afraid  this  Tribunal
    only has jurisdiction to consider whether there has been  a  breach  of
    human rights or racial discrimination, and my conclusion on both  those
    grounds, is that there has not and therefore  the  appeal  of  the  ECO
    against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  succeeds,  and  the
    appeal of the claimant must be dismissed.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.

Signed                              Date 1st December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.

Signed                              Date 1st December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

