
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)       Appeal Number: VA/18659/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                  Decision  and  Reasons
                                             promulgated
On 23 September  2014                                  On  2  December  2014



                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                  Pretoria
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                               Gawudencia Muza
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Dr. M. Mavaza.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Place promulgated on 26 June 2014 allowing Ms  Muza's  appeal  against
      the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  ('ECO')  dated  1  August
      2013 to refuse to grant entry clearance a a family visitor.


   2. Although  before  me  the  ECO  is  the  appellant  and  Ms  Muza  the
      respondent, for the sake of consistency with  the  proceedings  before
      the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to  Ms  Muza  as  the
      Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe born on 5 August 1951. By  way
      of a visa application form completed on 18 July 2013 she  applied  for
      entry clearance to visit her son Mr Innocent Muza ('the sponsor')  and
      daughter-in-law. The application was refused for reasons set out in  a
      Notice of Immigration Decision dated 1  August  2013  with  particular
      reference  to  paragraphs  41(i),  (ii),  (vi),  and  (vii)   of   the
      Immigration Rules. Essentially, the Respondent was  not  satisfied  in
      respect of the extent of the information  provided  by  the  Appellant
      with regard to her personal and financial  circumstances  in  Zimbabwe
      and in consequence doubted her intention to quit the UK following  her
      proposed visit; further, the Respondent was not satisfied that it  had
      been shown  that  the  sponsor  had  adequate  funds  to  support  the
      Appellant's visit, or that adequate accommodation was available.


   4. The Notice of Immigration  Decision  specified  that  the  Appellant's
      right of appeal was limited to the  grounds  referred  to  in  section
      84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


   5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  The  Grounds  of  Appeal,  amongst
      other things: alleged that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  consider
      Article 8 of the ECHR; pleaded that by virtue of the sponsor  being  a
      refugee he was not able to visit the Appellant in Zimbabwe,  and  that
      "the visit by the mother to the UK will have cemented  the  Article  8
      requirements"; and asserted that "the  appeal  should  be  allowed  on
      Rules and on Article 8 of the ECHR".


   6. A subsequent Review by an Entry Clearance  Manager  ('ECM')  dated  17
      April 2014 acknowledged that "the grounds of appeal  assert  that  the
      ECO's decision violated the appellant's Human Rights on the  basis  of
      there  being  interference  to  family  life  under  Article  8",  but
      maintained the decision to refuse entry clearance, asserting that "the
      decision  was  correct,  proportionate  and  in  accordance  with  the
      Immigration Rules".


   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge, having heard evidence from the sponsor,
      allowed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules for reasons
      set out in her determination.


   8. Judge Place found the sponsor to be a credible witness (paragraph 12);
      she found "the Appellant  has  strong  economic  and  social  ties  to
      Zimbabwe, and does intend a genuine visit and to leave the UK  at  the
      end of the visit" (aragraph 13); and also concluded "on the balance of
      probabilities [the sponsor and his wife]  are  able  to  maintain  and
      accommodate the Appellant during her proposed trip... [and]  are  able
      to fund her return journey" (paragraph 14).   Having  concluded  "that
      the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with  the  Immigration
      Rules" (paragraph 15), and having allowed the appeal,  the  Judge  did
      not consider 'human rights' grounds in the alternative.


   9. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Page on 11 August 2014.


Consideration: Error of Law

  10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  the  Appellant's  appeal  by
      reference to the Immigration Rules, allowed the appeal  on  the  basis
      that  the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  Rules,   and
      substituted his own decision under the Rules.  This  was  in  a  clear
      error of law in that it failed to  recognise  the  limitation  imposed
      upon the Appellant's right of appeal  was  such  that  the  ground  of
      appeal  under  section  84(1)(a)  -  "that  the  decision  is  not  in
      accordance  with  immigration  rules"  -  was  not  available  to  the
      Appellant.


  11. This was plainly a material error: notwithstanding that it was outside
      the scope of the appeal, and thereby beyond the  jurisdiction  of  the
      Tribunal,  the  Judge  founded  his  decision  on  re-evaluating   the
      Appellant's case under the Rules.


  12. Dr Mavaza submitted that I should  infer  from  the  concluding  words
      under the heading 'Decision' - "I allow the appeal" - that  the  Judge
      had also allowed the appeal on Article 8  grounds,  and  as  such  any
      error of jurisdiction in considering the appeal under  the  Rules  was
      ultimately not material. There is no merit in that submission,  and  I
      reject it: the Judge did not descend to any analysis under Article  8,
      and confined his considerations to the Rules.


  13. In such circumstances  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      materially erred, and that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      must be set aside.


Remaking the Decision

  14. Both representatives acknowledged that the  appeal  was  suitable  for
      consideration by the Upper Tribunal. The sponsor was  present,  and  I
      heard evidence from him both in-chief and under  cross-examination.  I
      then heard submissions from the representatives. I have made a careful
      note of the evidence and submissions in my record of  proceedings  and
      have had regard to all such matters in deciding this appeal.


  15. Although the Respondent's decision was  based  on  the  Appellant  not
      meeting the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and although  I  am
      not embarked upon a  consideration  of  an  appeal  where  the  ground
      pursuant to section 84(1)(a) is available  to  the  Appellant,  it  is
      nonetheless the fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  findings
      of  fact  -  not  themselves  expressly   challenged   and   eminently
      sustainable  -  to  the  effect  that  the  Appellant  did  meet   the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of the  Respondent's
      decision. Mr Bramble  frankly  acknowledged  that  if  Article  8  was
      engaged to an extent that the first two  Razgar  questions  should  be
      answered affirmatively in the Appellant's favour, such  findings  gave
      rise to difficulties for the Respondent in respect  of  the  remaining
      Razgar questions. Plainly if the  decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant
      entry clearance ran contrary to the requirements of the Rules it could
      not be maintained that the decision was in accordance  with  the  law;
      further,  it  could  not  readily  be  argued  that   any   consequent
      interference with private/family life was necessary  in  circumstances
      where  it  was  not  justified  under  the  Rules;  yet  further,  the
      imperative of maintaining  effective  immigration  control  could  not
      readily  be  relied  upon  as  a  justification  for  interference  in
      circumstances where the Appellant met the requirements imposed by  the
      Rules as a mechanism of such control.


  16. Whilst it is very likely - though not inevitable - that the refusal of
      entry clearance in a family visitor case will involve an  interference
      with the right to respect of either or both the applicant's and the UK-
      based sponsoring family member's  private  and/or  family  lives  (the
      first Razgar question),  in  my  judgement,  and  notwithstanding  the
      relatively low threshold, it is far less likely that  the  gravity  of
      any such interference will be such as to satisfy  the  second  of  the
      Razgar questions. Whether  or  not  it  does  will  be  fact-sensitive
      depending upon the circumstances  of  the  particular  case.  Relevant
      matters may  be  the  quality  of  the  family  life  enjoyed  between
      applicant and sponsor (perhaps involving consideration of  the  length
      of time they have spent apart  and  the  extent  and  quality  of  any
      previous family life prior to geographical separation), and the extent
      to which family life is, or may be,  adequately  maintained  by  means
      other  than  the  proposed  visit  to  the  UK  (which   may   include
      correspondence,   telephone   calls,   other   forms   of   electronic
      communication, and face-to-face meets whether in the home  country  of
      the appellant or some third country).


  17. A number of factors emerge from the evidence that,  in  my  judgement,
      are particularly pertinent to the evaluation of family life,  and  its
      quality in this appeal. I note the following:

(i) The sponsor is the eldest of eight children of the Appellant. Since  his
      father's death, as the eldest male he has become the "de facto head of
      the family" (determination of First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 5).  He
      told me that this meant he was responsible for family decisions -  for
      example, in the administration of his father's  estate  following  his
      death - albeit at times this was difficult at  'arm's  length'  whilst
      residing in the UK. In particular, in this context, he stated that  he
      had a continuing role in respect of his sister who was still at school
      in Zimbabwe. In my judgement this aspect of the  case  demonstrates  a
      continuing involvement in the mutual family life between the Appellant
      and the sponsor, notwithstanding the geographical separation  and  the
      time period over which they have been so separated.

(ii) The sponsor is a  recognised  refugee.  Necessarily  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect him to visit the Appellant in Zimbabwe.

(iii)  The  Appellant  and  the  sponsor  have  not  seen  each  other   for
      approximately  7  years.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  "it
      entirely plausible that the Appellant should wish to  see  her  eldest
      son again after a separation of some years" (paragraph 12). Indeed, in
      my  judgement,  in  circumstances  where  there  has  been  no  actual
      breakdown in the relationship between mother and son, such a period of
      separation likely make the desire to visit and see each other the more
      acute. On the facts of this particular case I do not consider that the
      period of separation is indicative of a deterioration in  the  quality
      of family life such as to defeat the Appellant's claim by reference to
      either of the first two Razgar questions.

(iv) In this context and generally I note that  the  sponsor  told  me  that
      there was something very particular, both for him and for his  mother,
      in his mother being able to see where he lived and how he lived in the
      UK. I accept this. Whilst not essential, it seems to me  a  matter  of
      some significance both out of a sense of  sated  curiosity  and,  more
      particularly, reassurance as to the well-being  of  offspring,  for  a
      parent to have direct knowledge of the way in which their adult  child
      is living his or her life. I accept that this is a relevant element of
      family life.

(v) The underlying purpose of the visit was for the Appellant to attend  the
      sponsor's graduation ceremony, as well as 'just' visiting him and  his
      wife. Necessarily the graduation ceremony was not an occasion that the
      Appellant could enjoy through the making of arrangements to  meet  the
      sponsor in some third country.


  18. Having regard to the matters set out above, I am satisfied  that  both
      the first and second Razgar questions are to be answered in favour  of
      the Appellant. The effect of the refusal of entry clearance denied the
      Appellant the opportunity of attending  her  eldest  son's  graduation
      ceremony, and also of seeing something of the life he has created  for
      himself in the UK as a refugee.  In  the  context  of  the  particular
      interrelationship of the Appellant and her son, those were significant
      and relevant aspects of family life, and were not  matters  of  family
      life that could be enjoyed by the Appellant  and  sponsor  meeting  in
      some third country.


  19. For the reasons already discussed  above  in  respect  of  the  third,
      fourth, and fifth Razgar questions, I find that the interference  with
      the Appellant's - and also the sponsor's -  family  life  was  not  in
      accordance with the law, was not necessary, and could not be justified
      as proportionate. Accordingly, the Respondent's decision was in breach
      of the Appellant's Article 8 rights by reference to any or all of  the
      final three Razgar questions.


  20. For the avoidance of any  doubt  I  have  had  regard  to  the  public
      interest considerations incorporated  at  sections  117A-117D  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (pursuant  to  amendments
      introduced by the Immigration Act 2014). In so far as the  Appellant's
      appeal succeeds by reference to the third and fourth Razgar questions,
      the 'public interest question' does  not,  strictly  speaking,  arise.
      Insofar as, in the alternative, the matters at  section  117C  may  be
      relevant to evaluation of the fifth Razgar question, there is  nothing
      to suggest that the facts and circumstances of the Appellant  and  the
      sponsor give rise to any adverse considerations: there is  no  English
      language issue, adequate funds for the purpose of the  proposed  visit
      were demonstrated to the satisfaction of the First-tier Tribunal,  and
      there is no issue of private life being established  at  a  time  when
      immigration status was precarious.


Notice of Decision

  21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  22. I re-make the decision. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     1 December 2014




