

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18956/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 April 2015                         |On 17 April 2015                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              hassan ayaz khan
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, instructed by Lee Valley Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the end of the hearing I gave my  decision  that  the  decision  and
    reasons statement of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lal  contained  legal
    errors such that it had to be set aside and remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard afresh.  I reserved my reasons, which I now give.

 2. The  judge  allowed  the  appeal,  finding  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the immigration rules because he was satisfied Mr  Khan
    intended to leave at the end of his proposed visit. This had  been  the
    sole reason for refusal.  The judge also found that  Mr  Khan's  family
    life was not respected by the  decision  because  it  prevented  family
    reconciliation following difficulties that arose from his brother,  the
    sponsor, marrying outside the family.

 3. The first legal error is that the judge did what he was  not  permitted
    to do. The appeal  was  against  the  decision  of  15  September  2013
    refusing entry clearance  as  a  visitor  under  paragraph  41  of  the
    immigration rules. Because the application for entry clearance was made
    after 25 June 2013,  Mr  Khan  could  only  bring  an  appeal  on  race
    relations and/or human rights grounds. Although the grounds  recognised
    this limitation and relied solely on human rights  grounds,  the  judge
    did not. He  made  findings  in  relation  to  the  immigration  rules,
    reaching a conclusion opposite to that of the Entry Clearance  Officer,
    regarding the appellant's intention to leave, even  though  he  had  no
    jurisdiction.

 4. The second error arose from the failure of the judge  to  identify  why
    Article 8 was engaged given the facts presented. He accepted there  was
    family life but gave no reasons for so doing other than  on  the  basis
    that Mr Khan was related to people living in the UK. As is  clear  from
    all sources of law (for example, Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)
    [2015] UKUT 112  (IAC)),  relationship  is  not  enough  of  itself  to
    establish family life except with regard to the relationships between a
    husband and wife or between parents and their dependent children.  This
    lack of reasoning undermines the findings made. Similarly, private life
    is not of itself established by a desire to visit  (see,  for  example,
    Sun Myung Moon (Human rights,  entry  clearance,  proportionality)  USA
    [2005] UKIAT 00112).  The failure to give adequate reasons is  a  legal
    error.

 5. Mr Jafar sought to defend the judge's findings but could only do so  by
    reference to evidence and arguments not mentioned by  the  judge.  This
    approach merely confirms that there is  inadequate  reasoning  and  the
    statement must be set aside.

 6. Mr Jafar  sought  to  preserve  the  findings  relating  to  Mr  Khan's
    intention to leave the UK. I  have  decided  that  is  not  appropriate
    because the Tribunal has no jurisdiction in relation to the immigration
    rules relating to visitors and to preserve this finding  would  suggest
    that it had some jurisdiction after all. In  addition  insofar  as  the
    issue of intention to leave might  be  relevant  to  the  human  rights
    issues, it will be for the next judge to decide whether such a  finding
    will be necessary at all.

 7. I refer to the next judge having to decide because in the circumstances
    I have described, the judge  having  made  significant  procedural  and
    other legal errors, the only proper course of action is for the  appeal
    has to be remitted for hearing afresh.

Postscript

 8. Following the hearing Mr Jafar asked my clerk to  recall  the  hearing.
    Unfortunately,  Mr  Kandola  had  departed  the  hearing  centre.   His
    colleague, Mr Kyriacou, attended in his place. Mr  Jafar  said  he  had
    instructions and for costs reasons the appellant and  sponsor  did  not
    want to pursue the appeal and in order to preserve the  finding  as  to
    intention to leave now wanted to withdraw the appeal.

 9. I pointed out two factors that  prevented  me  from  acceding  to  this
    request. First, I had given my decision orally at a hearing under  rule
    40 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  that
    disposed of the proceedings, although I confirmed I  would  put  it  in
    writing with reasons. Secondly, in any  event  it  was  not  Mr  Khan's
    appeal; it was the Entry Clearance Officer's.

10. Mr Jafar advised that in the circumstances he would advise Mr  Khan  to
    pursue the remitted appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Whether  that
    occurs will depend on what future instructions are given.



Decision

The Entry Clearance Officer's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed
because the decision and reasons statement of Judge Lal  contain  errors  on
points of law.

That decision and reasons statement is set aside and the appeal against  the
immigration decision of 15 September 2013  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.



Directions

The following directions apply to  the  remitted  hearing  unless  they  are
superseded by other directions given by the First-tier Tribunal.

      1. The remitted appeal is to be heard by any First-tier Tribunal Judge
         other than Judge Lal.


      2. The only issue to be considered in the remitted appeal is Article 8
         of the human rights convention.


      3. The parties are at liberty to file and serve any documents on which
         they seek to rely but must do  so  at  least  14  days  before  the
         hearing.  Failure to  do  so  may  result  in  evidence  not  being
         admitted.



                               Signed   Date 14 April 2015


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
