
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18112/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th August 2014                              |On 19th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD



                                   Between

                          ms SEKINAT ABIODUN AMINU
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                VISA OFFICER


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Aminu, Solicitor, Charles Hill & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who applied for  entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  Her
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer  (ECO)  and  her
    subsequent appeal allowed under the  Immigration  Rules  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malone in a  determination  promulgated  on  25th  April
    2014.

 2. The Respondent lodged grounds of application.  It was said that on 25th
    June 2013 Section 52 of the Crime and Courts  Act  2013  was  commenced
    which amended Section 88A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002. This change restricted the appeal rights for visitors  coming
    to visit family members here.  Applicants were still able to  bring  an
    appeal but only on the residual grounds of Section 84(1)(b) and (c)  of
    the 2002 Act, namely on human rights and race relations grounds.

 3. In this case the application was made on 17th July 2013 and as such the
    Appellant was only able to appeal on human rights  and  race  relations
    grounds.

 4. Despite this  the  judge  had  found  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the Rules and had gone on to allow the appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted primarily on the basis that the  judge
    had failed to recognise there  was  no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  an
    appeal under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 6. A Rule 24 notice was lodged stating that it was clear in the Grounds of
    Appeal that the substantial part of the grounds was and still is  under
    Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Act.  Those grounds gave the judge
    the jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 7. Based on the grounds which the judge must have perused he  would  still
    have allowed the appeal. The Appellant therefore  asked  the  court  to
    maintain the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 8. Thus the appeal came before me on the above date.

Submissions

 9. Mr Jarvis relied on his grounds.  If the judge really  was  considering
    the appeal on human rights grounds he had to grapple with  the  concept
    of family life sufficient to engage with Article 8 in the first  place,
    and he had not done that. The decision should  be  set  aside  and  the
    appeal dismissed.

10. Mr Aminu accepted that he had no case on the race relations ground  but
    he did have a case on human rights grounds.  The Appellant had a  right
    to a fair hearing.  The Appellant was also severely  disabled  and  the
    judge was aware of this matter.  I was asked to maintain the  decision.



Conclusions

11. The judge, albeit briefly, rehearsed the evidence and  noted  that  the
    Appellant was proposing to come for a visit for four weeks.   He  noted
    that proper arrangements had been made for the  Appellant's  travel  to
    the United Kingdom and her return to Nigeria. He concluded at paragraph
    19 that having considered the oral and written evidence  there  was  no
    justification for the ECO's querying the  Appellant's  intentions.   He
    found in paragraph 19 that the Appellant had genuinely sought leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a visitor  not  exceeding  six  months  and
    intended to leave. In the next paragraph he  found  the  Appellant  had
    satisfied the criteria set out  in  paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

12. It is manifestly clear that  the  judge  had  found  that  because  the
    Appellant was a genuine visitor and would return  to  Nigeria  that  he
    satisfied the terms of paragraph 41  and  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

13. The judge  did  not  consider  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.
    Unhappily it is clear that he failed to appreciate that the  rights  of
    appeal were restricted in the manner set out above.  Given  the  proper
    concession from Mr Aminu the  only  avenue  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    successful was an appeal on human rights grounds which is touched on in
    the grounds of appeal to the judge.

14. By allowing the appeal under paragraph 41 it is clear  that  the  judge
    erred in law and that the decision will have to be  set  aside  as  the
    Appellant was only able to appeal on human rights  and  race  relations
    grounds.

15. There is no evidence before me that the Appellant has not  had  a  fair
    hearing.  On the contrary, she was given  a  right  of  appeal  to  the
    Tribunal which evidence was heard and assessed.

16. No evidence was presented to suggest that the  Appellant  suffered  any
    form of discrimination at any point during the appeal process.

17. Given that the Appellant was proposing to come for a short visit  only,
    I have concluded that Article 8 ECHR is not engaged.  It was not argued
    before me that it was, only that the Appellant  was  severely  disabled
    and was entitled to a fair  hearing.  Even if Article 8 was engaged,  I
    cannot see that the refusal of the application is anything  other  than
    proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved,
    namely the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  country  through  immigration
    control.  I  received  no  argument  to  the  contrary  from  Mr  Aminu
    presumably because it is not a point which was properly arguable.

18. It is therefore necessary to set the decision aside and  make  a  fresh
    decision dismissing the appeal.















Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

20. I set aside the decision.

21. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


