
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/19193/2013
                                                               VA/19194/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2014                  |On 18 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                              Mr Sadruddin Ali
                               Mrs Mumtaz Ali
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    None
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellants, Mr and Mrs Ali, who are citizens of  Pakistan,  applied
    on 8 October 2013 for entry clearance to the UK as family visitors  for
    six weeks.  Their application was refused  on  4  November  2013.   The
    decision stated that their right of appeal was limited to  the  grounds
    referred to in Section 84(1)(c) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, which relates to human rights claims.

2.   Their grounds of appeal, submitted in identical terms  on  25  November
    2013, address the substantive issues in the decision and conclude  that
    "I humbly appeal under human rights act to grant my wife/husband and  I
    a visa to visit our sons and granddaughters in the UK".   This  is  the
    only reference in their Notices of Appeal to the Human Rights Act.

3.   On review on 18 February 2014 the Entry Clearance  Manager  upheld  the
    decision.  Under the heading "Preliminary Issue" he wrote:

         "I initially note that I am limited to considering  the  appeal  in
         relation to the Human Rights Act (HRA) and/or  the  Race  Relations
         Act (RRA) as the appellant was correctly afforded a  limited  right
         of appeal as he applied as a family  visitor  post  25/06/2013.   I
         kindly ask the Immigration Judge to consider the appellant's  right
         to a full appeal in the interest of continuity and fairness  before
         considering his grounds for appeal any further.


         The appellant has not alleged in his grounds  of  appeal  that  the
         decision breaches either the HRA or RRA."

4.   The appeal was heard by Judge Metzer at Taylor House  on  11  September
    2014.  The Appellants were not legally represented; the Respondent was.
     The father of Mr Sadruddin Ali attended the hearing and gave evidence.
     In a determination of 16 September, promulgated on 24 September, 2014,
    Judge Metzer allowed the appeal.  His reasoning addressed the merits of
    the refusal but did not address the issue of jurisdiction.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Respondent on 7  November  2014
    by Judge De Haney on the basis that:

         "The grounds of appeal assert that from 25 June 2013 the judge  had
         jurisdiction in visit visa appeals only in respect of human  rights
         & race relations.  The judge makes no findings on these matters."

6.   The error of law hearing took place before me on 16 December 2014.   By
    the time that I reached the appeal, at 11.10am, there was no appearance
    by the Appellants nor anybody on their behalf.  I satisfied myself from
    the file that proper notice of the date, time and place of the  hearing
    had been given to both of them, and had not been returned by  the  Post
    Office.  In the exercise of my  discretion  I  heard  the  appeal.   Ms
    Everett briefly expanded  orally  on  the  permission  application.   I
    reserved my determination.



Determination

7.   The issue is concise and discrete.  The applications and the  decisions
    were made after 25 June 2013, from which date Section 52 of  the  Crime
    and Courts Act 2013 limited appeals in visit visa applications to human
    rights and race relations grounds.

8.   The only reference to those grounds in the Notices of Appeal are  those
    which I have cited.  A bare reference to the Human Rights Act is not  a
    human rights claim.  Nothing in the grounds of appeal amplifies it, and
    nothing in the  determination  relates  to  the  human  rights  of  the
    Appellants or their family in the UK.  The Race Relations  Act  is  not
    raised.

9.   Without a human rights or race  relations  ground,  the  judge  had  no
    jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.  The benevolent  request  of  the
    Entry Clearance Manager for him to do so did not  confer  jurisdiction.
    For him to have assumed a jurisdiction which he did not possess  was  a
    material error of law.

10.  The determination is set aside for want of jurisdiction.

Decision

11.  The original determination was based upon an error of  law.   For  want
    of jurisdiction it is set aside.

12.  The Appellants do not have a right of appeal.

13.  There can therefore be no fee award.



Signed        Dated: 17 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

