

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/19742/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 April 2015                              |On 6 May 2015                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer (Accra)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Pricsilla Adjei
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Vigiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E. Aryee of Immigration Practitioners Service LLP



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Entry Clearance Officer ("the ECO") has been granted permission to
      appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S.  Taylor
      who, by a determination promulgated on 22 October  2014,  allowed  the
      respondent's appeal against refusal to grant her entry clearance for a
      family visit. To avoid confusion, I shall refer to the  respondent  as
      "the applicant".


   2. The applicant, who is a citizen of Ghana born on  14  September  1982,
      applied for entry clearance so that she could visit her  father,  step
      mother and step siblings who live in London. She  explained  that  she
      had lived as part of that family unit before they moved to the  United
      Kingdom in 1994. She remained in Ghana because, as  she  was  over  18
      years of age when the family decided to travel to the United  Kingdom,
      it was anticipated  that  she  would  not  be  able  to  secure  entry
      clearance for settlement. In 2012 she made a 3 month long visit to the
      United Kingdom and this time wished to stay  for  6  months.  She  had
      secured unpaid leave from her employment as well as the  agreement  of
      her partner in Ghana. She did not apply for entry clearance for her  2
      year old daughter because she anticipated that if she had done  so  it
      would have been assumed that she intended more  than  a  brief  family
      visit and so her application would be refused.

   3. That application was refused by a decision  of  the  ECO  made  on  15
      November 2013 because the ECO was not satisfied that the claimant  was
      a genuine visitor who intended to leave the United Kingdom at the  end
      of the visit, nor that she did not intend to take employment.

   4. Recognising that she could bring her appeal  only  upon  grounds  that
      refusal infringed rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR, that  was
      the basis upon which the applicant put  her  case  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal:

           "The appellant maintains  that  the  entry  clearance  Officer's
           decision to refuse her leave to enter into the UK is against her
           human rights, in particular her rights under the Art  8  of  the
           ECHR.


           The appellant says she has an established family life  with  her
           father Mr Adjei who is her sponsor.


           The appellant also says she has formed family life with her step
           mother and siblings in the UK.


           The appellant says that the ECO's decision to refuse her case is
           disproportionate interference to her right to family  life.  The
           appellant says that it is cheaper for her to visit her family in
           the UK to maintain the family life they  have  established  than
           for the family to visit her in Ghana."

   5. It is unambiguously clear that the decision of the judge to allow  the
      appeal discloses material legal error. Quite properly, Ms  Aryee  made
      no attempt to suggest otherwise. That is  because,  despite  the  fact
      that the grounds for appealing were based, and could  only  be  based,
      upon the asserted infringement of the applicant's  human  rights,  the
      judge allowed the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  refusal  was  not  in
      accordance with the immigration rules.

   6. It is not altogether difficult to see why the judge, on the  basis  of
      the information before him, thought that the applicant  did  meet  the
      requirements of the rules so  that  the  ECO  was  wrong  to  conclude
      otherwise. The judge had regard to the  earlier  visit,  completed  in
      compliance with the terms of the entry clearance granted,  noted  that
      the applicant had family ties and employment in  Ghana  and  that  the
      applicant had arranged for her mother, who lives in Ghana, to care for
      her two month old child while she was away. The judge said  there  was
      no reason to doubt that the applicant's employer  had  granted  unpaid
      leave for the visit so that her  employment  remained  available  upon
      return. The judge said:


           "On the evidence  before  this  Tribunal  I  find  no  basis  to
           conclude that she would seek employment in the UK  or  that  she
           would not return at the end of the visit."




      and concluded by saying:


           "DECISION


           The appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules is allowed."


   7. There is no discussion in the determination, at all,  of  the  grounds
      upon which the appeal was brought and it is plain that the  judge  has
      simply not engaged with, or considered, the claim under Article 8. The
      judge was required by  s86(2)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 to determine any matter raised as a ground of  appeal.
      What the judge in fact did was to determine a ground  of  appeal  that
      was not before him and failed to determine the only ground  of  appeal
      that was before him. Therefore, the decision to allow the appeal  must
      be set aside and made afresh.


   8. Ms Aryee referred in her submissions to Mostafa (Article  8  in  entry
      clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC), and invited the Tribunal to look  at
      the conclusion of the judge in this appeal that the applicant did meet
      the requirements of the applicable immigration rule and to  take  that
      as a starting point  for  the  assessment  of  the  ground  of  appeal
      available to the applicant,  which  was  that  refusal  to  grant  her
      application for a  visit  visa  would  infringe  rights  protected  by
      article 8 of the ECHR.

   9. That is the wrong approach. The first question to be addressed  in  an
      appeal against refusal to grant entry clearance  as  a  visitor  where
      only human rights grounds are available is whether Article  8  of  the
      ECHR is engaged at all. If it is not, which will not  infrequently  be
      the  case,  the  Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction  to  embark  upon  an
      assessment of the decision of the ECO under the rules and  should  not
      do so. If article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal will need to look at  the
      extent to which the applicant is said  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
      requirements of the rule because that will inform the  proportionality
      balancing exercise that must follow.

  10.  In  this  appeal  it  appeared  to  the  judge  that  the  applicant,
      notwithstanding  refusal  of  her  application,  in   fact   met   the
      requirements of the applicable immigration rule. That  issue  was  not
      before the judge. It  was  not  open  to  the  applicant  to  bring  a
      challenge on that basis and there was  no  challenge  in  that  regard
      pleaded in the grounds of appeal which asserted only that  refusal  of
      entry clearance would bring about an infringement of Article 8 of  the
      ECHR. Therefore there was no reason at all for  the  ECO  to  seek  to
      defend his decision on the basis that the applicant should be  treated
      as someone  who  had  not  met  the  requirements  of  the  applicable
      immigration rule, which is paragraph 41 of HC 395.  The  ECO  was  not
      represented before the judge. This meant that the judge has based  his
      findings of fact upon the case of one party only, as advanced  at  the
      hearing and not identified in the grounds of appeal, the  other  party
      having no notice of the challenge being pursued.

  11. In those circumstances the findings of fact carry very little  weight.
      If the claimant were to make a fresh application for  entry  clearance
      the ECO will, if requested to do so, have  regard  to  the  assessment
      carried out by the judge but will not be bound by  those  findings  to
      treat the applicant as a person who, at  least  at  the  date  of  the
      appeal hearing, met the requirements of paragraph 41.

  12. That approach accords with the legal framework established by  primary
      legislation which makes clear that there  is  no  longer  a  right  of
      appeal before the Tribunal against an adverse decision by an ECO in  a
      visit visa case except on human rights or race relations grounds.

  13. Nor is that approach inconsistent with Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
      clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC), the head note of which states:

           "In the  case  of  appeals  brought  against  refusal  of  entry
           clearance under  Article  8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to
           satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  is  not  the  question  to  be
           determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being  a  weighty,
           though not determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such
           refusal is proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing
           immigration control."

      That is because Mostafa is not authority  for  the  proposition  that,
      despite the legitimate legislative intention  to  remove  a  right  of
      appeal against adverse entry clearance applications in visit cases  on
      the grounds that the ECO was wrong to find the applicant did not  meet
      the requirements of the rules, the Tribunal can  nonetheless  continue
      to determine such issues. The point being made in  Mostafa  is  simply
      that where it is established that Article 8 is  in  fact  engaged,  it
      will still be necessary to assess  whether  the  applicant  meets  the
      substance of the rules:

           "In the limited class of cases  where  Article  8  (1)  ECHR  is
           engaged the refusal of entry clearance  must  be  in  accordance
           with the law and proportionate. If a person's  circumstances  do
           satisfy the Immigration Rules and they have not acted in  a  way
           that undermines the system of immigration control, a refusal  of
           entry clearance is liable to infringe Article 8."

      Put another way, a person who satisfies the tribunal that he does meet
      the requirements of para 41  of  HC  395  does  not  succeed  on  that
      account. He still  has  to  demonstrate  that  refusal  represents  an
      unlawful infringement of rights protected by Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
      For a person who does not satisfy the  requirements  of  para  41,  to
      succeed in an appeal there would have  to  be  cogent  and  compelling
      reasons demanding that he should succeed.


  14. The Tribunal made clear in Mostafa that it was  dealing  with  a  very
      narrow range of applicants:


           "... In practical terms this is likely to be  limited  to  cases
           where the relationship is that of  husband  and  wife  or  other
           close life partners or a parent and minor child and even then it
           will not necessarily be extended to cases  where,  for  example,
           the  proposed  visit  is  based  on  a  whim  or  will  not  add
           significantly  to  the  time  that  the  people  involved  spend
           together."


  15. In this case the position  is  entirely  different.  The  relationship
      between the claimant and her father and step  mother  is  one  between
      adult relatives that discloses no aspect of dependency or of being any
      different from what might be expected between such relatives. There is
      no evidence  of  any  particularly  strong  relationship  between  the
      claimant and her step siblings both of whom are now over 21  years  of
      age. There is no reason why those relationships cannot  be  maintained
      in the way that  relatives  who  have  chosen  to  live  in  different
      countries manage to do. There is no  good  reason  why  the  UK  based
      relatives cannot visit the claimant in Ghana if they wish  to  do  so.
      The applicant's father has visited her on 3 occasions  since  he  left
      Ghana on 1994 to move to London.


  16. Ms Aryee submitted that this was  a  close  family  and  that  it  was
      essential that the applicant be allowed to visit her relatives in  the
      United Kingdom in order to maintain and  develop  those  close  family
      relationships.

  17.  It  is  a  question  of  fact  in  each  case,  of  course,   whether
      relationships between adult  relatives  disclose  sufficiently  strong
      ties such as to fall within the scope of Article 8. Ties between young
      adults who have yet to establish their own family life  separate  from
      their parents may constitute family life: see Nasri v France (1995) 21
      EHRR 458. But this applicant has established her own  family  life  in
      Ghana with her partner and their daughter and while her adult siblings
      in the United Kingdom have not yet done so, it is established by Advic
      v United Kingdom 20 EHRR CD 125 that the protection of Article 8  does
      not extend to links between adult siblings living  apart  for  a  long
      period where they were not dependant upon  each  other.  There  is  no
      evidence of such dependence between these siblings  or  step-siblings.
      Finally, it is well established that  there  must  be  more  than  the
      normal emotional ties between adult relatives for family life to exist
      for the purposes of article 8 of the ECHR: Kugathas v IAT [2003]  EWCA
      Civ 31.

  18. It is clear that the circumstances of this applicant and her relatives
      in the United Kingdom do not give rise to family life for the purposes
      of article 8 of the ECHR and so the grounds of appeal advanced  before
      the Tribunal are simply unarguable.


  19. For these reasons the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  of  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer is allowed and I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  to
      dismiss the applicant's appeal against  refusal  to  grant  her  entry
      clearance as a visitor.

Summary of decision:

  20. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an  error  of  law  and  his
      decision to allow the appeal is set aside.


  21. I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the appeal.



                               Signed


                               [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 21 April 2015

