

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Numbers: VA/19254/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|24 October 2014                               |7 January 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MUSCAT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             KALEEM WASEEM HAYAT
                        (No anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: No appearance

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Muscat  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by the applicant
    against a decision made on 27 October 2013 refusing him entry clearance
    as a visitor. In this determination I will refer to the parties as they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and
    the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 23 December 1976. He has
    lived in Muscat, Oman since 11 September 2011 where he was employed  as
    an electronic computer technician. On 5  August  2013  he  applied  for
    entry clearance to visit his parents who are resident in the UK and  to
    attend  a  religious  convention  organised  by  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim
    community.

 3. The respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of para 41 of HC395. He noted that he intended  to  travel
    to the UK for two weeks  to  visit  family  members  and  to  attend  a
    conference.  He  had  submitted  with  his  application  a  letter   of
    invitation from his father  who  was  currently  residing  in  the  UK,
    letters from his employer and a bank statement to confirm his  personal
    circumstances in Oman. In his application he also indicated that he was
    the only member of his immediate family living there.  He  submitted  a
    copy of his wife's Canadian refugee protection  decision  which  showed
    that she had been granted refugee protection there  and  a  receipt  to
    show that he had applied to join her in Canada but no evidence had been
    shown that a decision had been made on that application.

 4. The respondent also noted that both the appellant's parents in  the  UK
    had sought leave to remain in a long term category outside  the  Rules.
    The appellant did not appear to have any other immediate family in Oman
    and did not have property  assets,  savings  or  investments  there  or
    elsewhere. He was not satisfied that  the  applicant  had  demonstrated
    sufficient ties there and because  he  had  not  travelled  to  the  UK
    previously, he had no record which allowed him to  compare  or  confirm
    that his circumstances were as he described.  On  the  evidence  before
    him, on the balance of probabilities, he was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a limited period
    as stated by him nor that he intended  to  leave  at  the  end  of  his
    proposed visit. Following a review by the Entry Clearance  Manager  the
    decision was maintained.

The Grounds of Appeal

 5. In his grounds of appeal the appellant repeated his wish to pay a brief
    two week visit to the UK to see his parents and to attend the Ahmadiyya
    Muslim Association annual convention. He argued that the respondent was
    not proportionate in his decision, which was unfair, irrational and  in
    breach of articles 8 and 9 of the ECHR. He wished to visit his  parents
    who had valid refugee status in the UK and it was further  argued  that
    the refusal breached article 8. The  grounds  argue  further  that  the
    issue of whether his future intention was to join his  wife  in  Canada
    was irrelevant but that this possibility increased the likelihood  that
    he would in fact leave the UK to be with his wife. It was not necessary
    to stop the appellant from visiting the UK when it was obvious,  so  it
    is asserted, that he was planning to reunite with his  wife  in  Canada
    and had an income in Oman.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appeal was decided without a hearing  on  14  July  2014.The  judge
    noted the grounds on which the application was refused and the  reasons
    given. After directing himself on the  burden  and  standard  proof  he
    said:

          "7. I am provided with a bundle of  documents  on  behalf  of  the
          appellant. They appear to show that he is from an  Ahmadi  family.
          His parents have leave to remain in the UK as refugees and he  has
          made an application to join his wife in Canada as a  dependant  on
          her refugee status. He  is  employed  in  Oman  as  an  electronic
          computer  technician.  The  grounds  of  appeal  argue  that   the
          appellant has not seen his parents since 2005 when  they  came  to
          the UK and that their finances and health do not  permit  them  to
          travel to Oman to see him and still less would  they  be  able  to
          travel to Canada once he settles there.


          8. Although the appellant is not  securely  settled  in  Oman  the
          marked appearance is that he has realistic expectations of joining
          his family in Canada. He would therefore have a  strong  incentive
          to comply with the Immigration Rules and to return to Oman. I find
          on the balance of probabilities that all the requirements of  para
          41 will be satisfied and I allow the appeal."

 7. The respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  this  decision
    arguing in the grounds that the judge  had  overlooked  the  fact  that
    there were restricted appeal rights for  visitors  and  that  the  only
    grounds of appeal were the residual grounds in S.84 (1)(b) and  (c)  of
    the Nationality and Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  namely  human
    rights and race relations grounds. It was therefore  not  open  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to consider whether the decision was in  accordance
    with the immigration rules or otherwise not in accordance with the law.
    The judge failed to make  any  findings  on  human  rights  grounds  as
    required and had therefore erred in law.

 8. When granting permission to appeal in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Page said:

          "The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  paragraph  41   of   the
          immigration rules upon finding the appellant would have  a  strong
          incentive to comply with the immigration  rules  by  returning  to
          Oman.  The  grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the  judge  had  no
          jurisdiction to hear this appeal and determined the  appeal  under
          the immigration rules. On 25 June 2013 section 52 of the Crime and
          Courts Act was commenced. This amended section 88A of the 2002 Act
          to restrict the appeal rights of  those  refused  visit  visas  to
          grounds of appeal on human rights and race relation grounds  only.
          The restrictions apply to any applications made  on  or  after  25
          June 2013. In this case the appellant made his case  on  5  August
          2013 so was only able to appeal on human rights and race relations
          grounds. The judge did not  make  any  findings  on  human  rights
          grounds as required and the determination did not record that  the
          appellant appealed on human rights grounds. The grounds of  appeal
          raise an  arguable  error  of  law  so  permission  to  appeal  is
          granted."








    Assessment of the issues

 9. There has been no appearance by or on behalf of  the  appellant.  I  am
    satisfied that the notice  of  hearing  has  been  properly  served  on
    nominated solicitors in the UK. In the absence of any  explanation  for
    their failure to attend I am satisfied that the  proper  course  is  to
    proceed with this hearing.

10. The first issue is whether the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  such
    that its decision should be set aside. There is a clear error of law in
    that the judge dealt with the appeal on the basis that it was an appeal
    under the immigration rules. However, in  the  light  of  the  date  of
    application and the provisions of s.52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013
    the right of appeal was  limited  to  human  rights  grounds  and  this
    restriction is noted  at  the  foot  of  the  decision  refusing  entry
    clearance. In the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant relied on articles 8 and 9 of the ECHR.  Instead  of  dealing
    with those articles the judge erred by dealing with the appeal as if it
    was an appeal being pursued under the immigration rules. By doing so he
    erred in law and the error is such that the decision must be set aside.

11. I now move on to re-making the decision. I am not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent's decision would lead to a breach of article 8 or article 9.
    Article 8 deals with the right to respect for private and  family  life
    and the appellant's argument in substance is that the refusal of  entry
    clearance to visit his parents in this country is  an  interference  to
    the right to respect for his family life so engaging article 8(1) which
    is not proportionate to a legitimate aim within article 8(2).  However,
    an appeal on human rights grounds cannot be used as  a  vehicle  for  a
    merits appeal under the rules. The respondent is entitled  to  set  out
    requirements in the rules which must be met before entry  clearance  is
    granted. It is not argued that the rules the applicant had to meet were
    either unreasonable or irrational and  the  respondent's  decision  was
    clearly within the range of decisions reasonably open to him. The  fact
    of the matter is that the evidence put before the  respondent  did  not
    persuade him on a balance of probabilities that the rules could be met.



12. In these circumstances even assuming the refusal of a two  week  family
    visit engages the right to respect for the appellant's family life,  it
    cannot be argued that the respondent's decision can be  categorised  as
    disproportionate to a  legitimate  aim  set  out  in  article  8(2)  in
    circumstances where he was unable to satisfy the  respondent  that  the
    requirements of the rules were met.

13.  The appellant also raises article 9 which provides that  everyone  has
    the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion and  that  the
    freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs shall be subject only  to
    such limitations as  prescribed  by  law,  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society for the interest of public safety, for the protection of public
    order, health or morals or for the protection of the rights of freedoms
    of others. I am not satisfied that the refusal of permission  to  visit
    to attend a conference engages article  9  or  that  the  inability  to
    attend a two week conference  is  any  inhibition  on  the  appellant's
    rights to freedom  of  thought,  conscience  and  religion.  For  these
    reasons, I am not satisfied that the decision to refuse entry clearance
    amounted to a breach of either article 8 or 9.

Decision

14. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision is set  aside.  I
    re-make the decision by dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.









Signed                                  Date 20 November 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
