
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: vA/21639/2012
                                                               VA/21635/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 September 2013                          |On 25th October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DESIGNATED TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - MOSCOW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   YA, 1st
                                     and
                                   AA, 2nd

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Fransman, for Gherson Solicitors, London



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    however for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Russia born on 1  February  1980  on  27
    December 2007 respectively.  The first appellant is the mother  of  the
    second appellant.  They appealed against the decision of the respondent
    dated 24 May 2012 refusing to grant them entry clearance to the  United
    Kingdom as visitors.  Their appeals were heard by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Suchak and allowed under the Immigration Rules and  under
    Article 8 of ECHR in a determination promulgated on 17 May 2013.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  respondent
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Garratt
    on 19 July 2013.  The grounds  of  application  argue  that  the  judge
    exceeded his jurisdiction because there is  only  a  limited  right  of
    appeal for the appellants, on human rights grounds, as they are general
    and not family visitors and the judge's findings relating to Article  8
    of ECHR are wrong in law because the judge failed to have regard to the
    new  Immigration  Rules  when  making  the  Article  8  proportionality
    assessment.  The permission refers  to  paragraphs  55  to  70  of  the
    determination in which the judge considers the  refusal  of  the  first
    appellant's appeal under the provisions of  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
    Immigration Rules when he had no jurisdiction  to  consider  an  appeal
    under the Rules.  The grounds go on to state  that  this  is  an  error
    which affected the judge's consideration of the  human  rights  issues.
    The judge dealt with Article 8 of ECHR on the basis that the protection
    of a person's reputation should be considered when Article 8  is  dealt
    with.  The permission then refers to the ground  relating  to  the  new
    Immigration Rules but states that this is  unarguable  as  the  refusal
    decisions which form the basis of the appeals were made on 24 May  2012
    before the new Rules came into operation on 9 July 2012.


Determination

 4. I have to decide if there is a material error of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination.  The Presenting  Officer  referred  to  the  appellants'
    skeleton argument and submitted that she is relying on the  grounds  of
    application.  She  submitted  that  the  judge  materially  misdirected
    himself in law and took into account matters which he should  not  have
    considered as there is no  appeal  under  the  Rules  and  the  judge's
    approach was therefore flawed.  She submitted  that  paragraph  320(7B)
    should only have been considered under the prism of Article 8 and  that
    the judge's Article 8 findings are tainted by his consideration of  the
    Immigration Rules before dealing with Article 8, as the  judge  had  no
    jurisdiction relating to the Rules.

 5.  Counsel  for  the  appellant  submitted  that  the  only  ground   for
    consideration is section 84 (1) (c)  of  the  2002  Act.  Both  parties
    accepted this.

 6. I was referred to paragraph 85 of the determination which  states  that
    the appeal of the first appellant  is  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 of ECHR. Counsel submitted that  this  is  an
    error on the part of the judge but  the  judge  did  not  approach  the
    determination in an incorrect way. Counsel  submitted  that  the  words
    "under the Immigration  Rules  and"  should  not  have  been  put  into
    paragraph 85 and submitted that if  these  words  are  struck  out  the
    determination can stand. He submitted that these words  are  surplusage
    and aberrational and there is no material error of law  although  there
    is this technical error.

 7. He referred me to his skeleton argument which states that the focus  of
    this case is the Article 8 approach made by the  judge.   He  submitted
    that all the evidence before the judge was  admissible  and  the  judge
    considered the 5 step process in Razgar (2004) UKHL 27. I was  referred
    to the case of Huang [2007] UKHL11 which states that it is the duty  of
    the judge to find on the facts and in this case  the  judge  looked  at
    everything including the issue of false representation.  The judge  was
    well aware that he was dealing with a  human  rights  appeal  only  and
    Section 84 (1)  (c).   This  is  made  clear  at  paragraph  6  of  the
    determination when he refers to the Entry  Clearance  Manager's  review
    letter.

 8. Counsel submitted that when the judge dealt with proportionality he had
    to decide   whether there  had  been  deception  on  the  part  of  the
    appellants. The judge states that if the appellant used deception  then
    the decision is proportionate.

 9. Counsel submitted that the judge had to decide whether there are  false
    answers in  the  visa  application  form.  The  judge  noted  that  the
    presenting officer has conceded that  question  10  of  this  form  was
    answered honestly. In paragraph  61  of  the  determination  the  judge
    states that the appellant correctly answered that she was  not  refused
    entry on arrival.  In paragraph 65 he deals with Q79 of  the  form  and
    finds that the appellant has  not  given  incorrect  answers.   Counsel
    submitted that this goes to the crux  of  the  respondent's  case.   At
    paragraph 69 of the determination the judge refers to the  case  of  AA
    (Nigeria) (2010) EWCA Civ 773 and finds that the appellant made a  full
    disclosure of her previous immigration history and did not set  out  to
    deceive the respondent and/or use deception.  Because of these findings
    he goes on to state that the respondent has  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden upon him and has made a decision which is not in accordance with
    the law and the Immigration Rules.  The  judge  had  to  make  findings
    relating to paragraph 320 (7B) to enable  him  to  deal  properly  with
    proportionality.

10. Counsel submitted that the determination is impeccable. The  judge  has
    gone through the step by step approach required in the case of  Razgar.
    At paragraph 77 he refers to reputation, the appellant's  private  life
    in the UK and the ties she has developed  here  over  the  years.   The
    judge quotes the relevant law and at paragraphs 82 and  83  finds  that
    Article 8 is engaged. He then deals with proportionality, finding  that
    Rule 320 (7B) does not apply in this case as there was no deception.

11. It was submitted that the  only  error  is  the  surplusage  previously
    referred to. The respondent states that paragraph 86  has  tainted  the
    whole decision but he has not explained how it has done so and  it  was
    submitted that it has not done so.

12. Counsel submitted that there is no error of law in  the  determination.
    All there is is a technical error. The determination does  not  require
    to be set aside. The findings of fact are not challenged.

13. The Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  it  is  not  clear  from  the
    determination whether the judge knew that he was only dealing with  the
    human rights aspect of this claim.  She submitted that paragraphs 54-70
    inclusive tell a different story. She  submitted  that  the  burden  of
    proof has not been discharged by the appellant and the judge has made a
    material error of law.


Determination

14. I have to decide whether the judge was aware that the only claim  being
    considered is under ECHR and whether the decision made by the judge  is
    only flawed because of a technicality.

15. The determination makes it clear that the judge knew that there was  no
    valid  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  he  was  only
    considering the human rights aspect of the appeal. At  paragraph  6  he
    refers to the appellants being general visitors and only being entitled
    to a limited right of appeal on human rights  grounds.  When  he  deals
    with pre hearing matters he states that the appellants are  not  family
    visitors. I am satisfied that the judge knew that he was  only  dealing
    with the human rights aspect of the claim.

16. Before the judge could make a finding under Article 8 of ECHR he had to
    deal with the appellant's supposed deception. He found at paragraph  69
    of the determination that there was no deception. He explained this  at
    paragraphs 54 to 69. The judge went on to  deal  with  proportionality.
    Had there been deception the Article 8 claim could not have  succeeded.



17. The judge referred  to  the  relevant  case  law  and  found  that  the
    appellant has private life in the United  Kingdom.  He  had  to  decide
    whether, if the appeal is not allowed the interference with her private
    life will or will not be in accordance with the law.  At  paragraph  82
    the judge states "I cannot see that  such  interference  is  necessary.
    There is no question of national security, public safety etc,  referred
    to in proposition (iv) of Razgar.  The appellant has had an  impeccable
    immigration history.  The question as in  all  cases  is  whether  such
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved."  At paragraph 83 he finds that the decision  to  refuse  the
    visit visa cannot be proportionate.  The appellant was refused entry on
    26 August 2011 through no fault of her own, having been admitted to the
    UK on  24  previous  occasions  during  the  last  15  months,  on  her
    Panamanian passport.  There is nothing to suggest she is not a  genuine
    visitor.  After finding this, the  judge  goes  on  to  deal  with  the
    totality of the evidence before him. He finds that the  respondent  has
    failed to discharge the burden upon him on a balance of probabilities.

18. There is a technical error of law in the judge's determination but this
    is not a material error.



                                  DECISION

19. The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suchak should not be set
    aside. Paragraph 85 of the decision should be deleted and  replaced  by
    the words "The appeal of the first appellant is allowed under Article 8
    of ECHR."

20. Paragraph 320 (7B) of the Immigration Rules  does  not  apply  in  this
    case.

21. The appeals of the  first  and  second  appellants  are  allowed  under
    Article 8 of ECHR.




Signed                                  Date 25th October 2013


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



