

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/22514/2012
        VA/22549/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  18 October 2013                           |On 22nd October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 ALIYA BI BI
                                 AMIR FATIMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  no appearance
For the Respondent: Mrs Brewer, HOPO

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. This is the Appellants  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Sarsfield made following a hearing at Bradford  on  the
      18 January 2013, dismissing their  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
      decision to refuse to grant them entry clearance as visitors.


   2. The Sponsor wrote to the Tribunal prior to the hearing saying that she
      was not able to take time off work and would therefore not be able  to
      attend the hearing.

   3. The Respondent served a reply  defending  the  determination  but  Mrs
      Brewer sensibly acknowledged its deficiencies, in particular the  lack
      of engagement with the evidence of the Sponsor,  who  attended  before
      Judge Sarsfield. She accepted that the most sensible course  would  be
      for the matter to be reheard.

   4. The judge erred in law in failing to consider material evidence namely
      the lengthy and extensive grounds of appeal  and  the  Sponsor's  oral
      evidence upon which he made no findings.

   5. This appeal will be reheard at Bradford  before  a  Judge  other  than
      Judge Sarsfield.


Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
