
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Sheldon Court Birmingham                 Decision Promulgated
On: 2 May 2014                               On: 6 May 2014

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                              Mr Khalid Bashir

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Abu Dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION


The appellant is a national of Pakistan. His date  of  birth  is  1  January
1971.

The appellant applied for a visit visa to come to  see  his  maternal  first
cousin and other relatives in the UK. That application  was  refused  on  18
June 2012. The appellant appealed and his appeal was refused by  Immigration
Judge Clarke in a determination promulgated on 10 December 2013.

The First-tier Tribunal determination at [3] notes that no-one attended  for
the appellant. It states that this was so notwithstanding  good  service  on
the appellant.  I cannot find a notice of  hearing  sent  to  the  appellant
concerning the hearing on 27 November 2013, only one  dated  8  August  2013
addressed to the sponsor, Mrs Safina Manize and the Home  Office  Presenting
Unit. Judge Clarke also stated at [3] that no adjournment request  had  been
made and proceeded to determine the appeal, dismissing it.

One of the reasons given for dismissing  the  appeal  is  at  [12],  to  the
effect that found Judge Clarke found the  sponsor's  "absence  (without  any
explanation)  itself  casts  doubt  on  the  integrity  of  the  Appellant's
application."

The ground of appeal is that the sponsor did not get the notice  of  hearing
dated 8 August 2013 so did not attend and that the  comment  at  [12]  shows
that her absence was material to the decision.

I accepted for a number of reasons that  Mrs  Manize  did  not  receive  the
notice of hearing dated 8 August 2013. Firstly, the appellant  paid  for  an
oral hearing and wanted Mrs Manize, to attend the hearing to give  evidence.
The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal state  that  to  be  so  in
terms on page 6 of 7. Secondly, the  hearing  was  initially  listed  for  9
August 2013. The Tribunal file shows that on 6 August 2013 Mrs Manize  wrote
to the Tribunal asking for an adjournment as there had been a death  in  the
family. That handwritten letter is stamped as received by the Tribunal on  8
August 2013. It indicated  to  me  her  active  interest  in  attending  the
appeal. Thirdly, she attended  the  hearing  before  me  and  gave  entirely
straightforward and clear evidence as to not having received the  notice  of
hearing dated 8 August 2013 and I found her to be credible in that regard.

I was satisfied that a procedural error occurred as Mrs Manize did not  have
notice of the hearing on 27 November 2013  and  that  the  finding  at  [12]
showed that this was material to the outcome  of  the  appeal.  If  she  had
attended, it is possible the appeal would have been determined differently.

I found an error of law  such  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal  should  be  set  aside.  As  the  procedural  error  deprived  the
appellant of a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  it  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal now following paragraph 7.2  of  Part  3  of  the
Senior President's Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012.

The appeal is now listed to be heard on 23 June 2014 at the  Sheldon  Court,
Birmingham hearing centre. The sponsor was informed of the hearing date  and
venue by me on 2 May 2014.


DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  on  a  point
of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made.

Signed: [pic]                                Date: 2 May 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


