
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/22891/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th May 2013                                 |On 17th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                            thi ngoc diem nguyen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - bangkok
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Merrylees, Counsel instructed by Jo & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of  Vietnam  born  on  1st  September
    1983.  She applied for  entry  clearance  as  a  family  visitor  which
    application was refused on 25th May 2012 for the  reasons  given  in  a
    Notice of Decision of that  date.   The  Appellant  appealed,  and  her
    appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Elvidge  (the
    Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 22nd November 2012.  He dismissed the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds for  the
    reasons given in  his  Determination  dated  28th  November  2012.  The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal, and such permission  was  granted  on
    12th March 2013.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  The Judge  allowed  the
    appeal  under  paragraph  320(7A)  of  the  Statement  of  Changes   in
    Immigration Rules HC 395 and also under paragraphs  41(vi)  and  (vii).
    However he dismissed the appeal under paragraphs 41(i)  and  (ii).   At
    the hearing, it was argued by Mr Merrylees that the Judge had erred  in
    law in dismissing the appeal under those paragraphs.   He  relied  upon
    the grounds seeking leave and pointed out that at paragraph 49  of  the
    Determination the Judge found that he was satisfied that the  Appellant
    would leave the UK within the period of the six month  visa.   Further,
    the Judge had made mistakes of fact amounting to mistakes of law by not
    understanding that the hairdressing business had  been  transferred  to
    the Appellant by her mother in April 2012, and that the  Appellant  had
    obtained a residence order in respect of her son in November 2011.  The
    Appellant therefore had ties with Vietnam and every  reason  to  return
    there.

 3. In response, Ms Ong submitted that the Judge had not erred in law.   He
    had made findings open to him on the evidence, and the grounds  seeking
    leave amounted to no more than a disagreement with his decision.

 4. I find an error of law in the Judge's decision so that it should be set
    aside.  It is apparent from what the Judge wrote at paragraph 50 of the
    Determination that he decided to dismiss the appeal because he did  not
    believe that  the  Appellant  intended  a  visit  of  only  two  weeks'
    duration, although he accepted that she had no intention to overstay  a
    six month visa.  This decision was  based  at  least  in  part  on  his
    finding that the Appellant worked in a business owned  by  her  mother,
    whereas by the date of decision  the  Appellant  owned  that  business.
    Further, the Judge found that the Appellant would be willing  to  leave
    her son in the care of her grandmother for longer than two  weeks,  not
    appreciating that the Appellant had a residence order in respect of her
    son.  The  Judge's  decision  is  therefore  based  upon  an  erroneous
    understanding of the facts of  the  case  which  led  him  to  a  wrong
    conclusion.

Re-made Decision

 5. I decided to proceed to re-make the decision  of  the  Judge.   At  the
    hearing I heard  submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties  which  are
    recorded in the Record of Proceedings.

 6. The only issue in this appeal is now whether  the  Appellant  genuinely
    sought entry for a limited period as stated by her  not  exceeding  six
    months; and intended to leave the UK at the end of the period  of  that
    visit as stated by her.  The burden of proof is upon the Appellant, and
    the standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.

 7. The undisputed facts of this case are that in May  2011  the  Appellant
    visited the UK with her mother.  At the time that application was made,
    the Appellant was a married woman with a young son  living  in  Vietnam
    where her mother and sister also lived.  She had regular employment and
    also worked part-time  in  her  mother's  hairdressing  business.   The
    stated purpose of the visit was to spend  a  short  period  in  the  UK
    seeing the Appellant's brother who was a student there.

 8. The Appellant's mother returned to  Vietnam  after  two  weeks  of  the
    visit, but the Appellant remained owing to ill-health.  Eventually  the
    Appellant met a British citizen of Vietnamese origins  named  Duc  Chu,
    the present Sponsor.  They  began  a  relationship  and  the  Appellant
    resigned from her employment in Vietnam.  Despite the relationship, the
    Appellant returned to Vietnam on 23rd  October  2011  before  her  visa
    expired.

 9. Following her  return  to  Vietnam,  in  November  2011  the  Appellant
    divorced her husband and obtained custody of her son.  In January  2012
    the Sponsor visited Vietnam and married the Appellant.  He returned  to
    the UK about a month later.   In  April  2012  the  Appellant's  mother
    assigned to her the  hairdressing  business.   The  Appellant  and  her
    mother then applied for entry clearance to come to the UK for a  period
    of three months in order to visit the Sponsor, the Appellant's husband,
    and to have a wedding celebration for his relatives who had been unable
    to attend the marriage in Vietnam.

10. Although the presence of the Appellant's husband in the UK might arouse
    suspicions as to  the  Appellant's  intentions,  I  find  credible  her
    evidence that she intends to return to Vietnam at the end of her visit.
     I come to that conclusion on the basis of the immigration  history  of
    the Appellant and her family who have always complied with  immigration
    requirements.  It is true that in respect of  her  previous  visit  the
    Appellant stated that she would visit for a short period  but  remained
    for six months.  However I attach little weight to this fact because  I
    consider it more  significant  that  notwithstanding  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor which  had  then  developed,  the
    Appellant returned to Vietnam in accordance with the terms of her visa.
     The Appellant has ties with Vietnam in that she is the proprietor of a
    business there and her mother, sister, and more to the point,  her  son
    live there.  I am therefore satisfied that  the  Appellant  intends  no
    more than a visit to the UK after which she will return to  Vietnam  in
    accordance with the terms of her visa.

Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  I
    find no reason to make one.






Signed                              Dated 17th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the light of my decision  to  re-make  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal by allowing the appeal, I have considered whether  to  make  a  fee
award.  Although I have allowed the appeal, I decide to make  no  fee  award
because I have decided the appeal on the  basis  of  facts  which  were  not
known to the Entry Clearance Officer.






Signed                              Dated 17th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

