
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/28507/2012
     VA/28512/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2013                               |24th June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                Husnara Begum
                               Amran Ali Rahi
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Kalam of Kalam, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on  22  February  2013  dismissing  their  appeals
    against the respondent's decisions dated 17  July  2012  refusing  them
    entry clearance as family visitors.

Background

2.   The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.   The  first  appellant  was
    born on 9 October 1978 and the second appellant is her dependent  son,
    born on 23 November 2008.  On 26 June  2012  they  applied  for  entry
    clearance as family visitors to visit the first appellant's brother and
    his wife, the sponsor, in the UK.  In her application  form  the  first
    appellant said that she was supported  by  her  husband,  she  did  not
    receive income from any sources, including friends  or  family  but  in
    answer to the question whether  she  had  savings,  property  or  other
    income she referred to family land.  She said that all the costs of the
    trip would be met by her sponsor.

3.   On 3 July 2012 the first appellant was interviewed and on 10 July  2012
    there was a field visit to her home address,  which  was  found  to  be
    correct.  Her spouse was said to be at his business address during  the
    investigation.  The field report continues: "the financial condition of
    the family is not good  enough.   The  neighbours  have  confirmed  the
    family relationship of the applicants."

4.   The respondent was not satisfied that the appellants were able to  meet
    the requirements of the rules.  He commented that the exact  nature  of
    the relationship  of  the  appellants  to  the  sponsor  had  not  been
    clarified.  According to the application, the visit would be for ten to
    twelve  weeks.   There  was  no  satisfactory  documentation  that  the
    appellants were related as claimed or satisfactory evidence of how they
    supported themselves in Bangladesh.  They had declared no employment or
    income and had not  demonstrated  any  other  income  from  friends  or
    family.  There were no credible bank  statements  or  evidence  of  any
    savings on which they could draw to support themselves.   As  they  had
    not  shown  that  they  had  any  employable  skills,   experience   or
    qualification,  their  current  and  future  prospects  in   Bangladesh
    appeared extremely modest and uncertain.

5.   In these circumstances the respondent was not satisfied that a  genuine
    visit was intended for the purpose and period claimed.  There was  also
    limited evidence about the financial circumstances of their sponsor  in
    the  UK  and  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  cost  of
    maintaining and accommodating them for a twelve  week  visit  would  be
    proportionate to the sponsor's circumstances.  On review  the  decision
    was maintained.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the judge heard  evidence
    from the sponsor who confirmed that the appellants were her cousin  and
    nephew respectively.  The  first  appellant  had  an  extended  family,
    including her husband  and  intended  to  return  to  Bangladesh.   The
    sponsor resided in a four  bedroom  property  and  that  would  provide
    adequate accommodation for the appellants.  Her husband confirmed  that
    the first appellant was his sister and the second appellant his  nephew
    and that a genuine visit was intended.

7.   A report was produced in evidence from Southampton City  Council  about
    the accommodation available at the sponsor's property. It is  described
    as a house consisting of four bedrooms, one living room,  one  bathroom
    and one kitchen.  At the time of the inspection on 30 May 2012  it  was
    occupied by three adults and one child,  including  the  sponsor.   The
    report  says  that  the  property  would  become  overcrowded  if   the
    applicants were to reside there, as there were would not be  sufficient
    bedrooms available.  The judge referred to that report in his  decision
    and found that the  appellants  had  failed  to  show  there  would  be
    adequate accommodation.

8.    The  judge  noted  that  the  appellants  did  not  have  an   adverse
    immigration history but commented that there was no  reliable  evidence
    to show the source of the husband's income and its  level.   Therefore,
    although he was satisfied that the sponsor would have adequate means to
    provide for the maintenance of the appellants for the duration of their
    visit,  he  was  not  satisfied  they  could  meet  the   accommodation
    requirements of the rules or in the light of the lack of evidence about
    their financial circumstances that they simply intended to visit the UK
    for a limited period or to leave at the end of that visit.

The Grounds

9.   In the grounds it is argued that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    letter from Southampton City Council as  a  whole.   It  said  that  no
    bedroom should be occupied by  more  than  two  people  but  under  the
    Housing Act 1985, a four bedroomed house permitted occupation  by  nine
    and a half people before it was statutorily overcrowded.  Secondly,  it
    is argued that the appellants had no adverse  immigration  history  and
    the judge had wrongly inferred from their economic  circumstances  that
    they would not return.  Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 29 April 2013.

The Error of Law

10.  At the hearing before me Ms Tanner conceded that the  judge  had  erred
    in law. Assuming it to be the case that there were three adults  and  a
    child at the property and two adults  shared  a  bedroom,  there  would
    still be one spare  bedroom.   The  issue  of  accommodation  did  need
    further scrutiny.  She also pointed out that the decision did not refer
    to the field visit to the appellants' village which appeared to confirm
    that the address was genuine and that the first appellant's husband had
    a business address and was in employment.  I  am  satisfied  that  this
    concession is correctly made and that the judge erred in law as set out
    in the grounds and as conceded by Ms Tanner.  The error is  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  in  these  circumstances  the
    decision  should  be  set  aside.   Both  representatives  agreed  that
    I should proceed to re-make the decision.

Further Evidence

11.  I heard  oral  evidence  from  the  sponsor  who  adopted  her  witness
    statement of 31 January 2013.  This confirms that she is the  maternal
    cousin of the first appellant and the second appellant is  her  nephew.
    Her husband is the first appellant's brother.  The appellants  live  in
    Alongkary in district Sylhet in Bangladesh.  She says  that  the  first
    appellant fully intends to return to Bangladesh as  her  husband  lives
    there, as do  her  extended  family  and  childhood  friends.   She  is
    responsible for looking after her family and needs to remain  in  close
    proximity to them in case of family emergencies.  The  sponsor  accepts
    that she has a responsibility to make sure  the  appellants  return  to
    Bangladesh before their  visas  expire.   She  says  she  has  credible
    standing in her society and she cannot go against the law of this land.
     She gives details about her employment.   She  confirms  that  if  the
    appellants come to stay, the property would not be overcrowded.

12.  When cross-examined she confirmed that at the date  of  decision  their
    property was occupied by her and her husband, his mother and father and
    her younger brother.  There  was  a  spare  bedroom.   Since  then  her
    brother has left to live  with  an  older  sister  nearby.   The  first
    appellant's husband had land and  a  small  farm  with  a  business  in
    Bangladesh although she did not know what it was.  Both the  appellants
    were healthy.  The first appellant would return as the second appellant
    would have to go to school and she also had to look after her husband's
    parents and, although her husband would be able to do that for a  short
    period, that could not be a long-term arrangement.  Ms Tanner  did  not
    wish to ask the sponsor's  husband  any  questions  about  his  witness
    statement and he did not give oral evidence.

Submissions

13.  Ms Tanner relied on the reasons given in the respondent's decision  and
    emphasised the fact that the appellants had still provided very  little
    evidence to confirm their family circumstances and  this  must  cast  a
    doubt on their intentions.


14.  Mr Kalam submitted that evidence had been submitted of  land  ownership
    but he accepted that there were no  bank  statements,  other  proof  of
    income or related tax documents.  However, the field  report  confirmed
    that the address was genuine and that the first appellant's husband was
    in business even if a modest one.  All the  costs  of  the  visit  were
    being met by the sponsor and her husband.  In the  light  of  the  fact
    that there was a husband and his parents remaining  in  Bangladesh  and
    the child was 4 and would need to return for education, the  likelihood
    was that the first appellant and the sponsor were right to say  that  a
    visit was intended only for the period declared in the application.  He
    referred to the authorities set out in the grounds of  appeal  that  an
    adverse finding on an appellant's intentions must be based on  evidence
    not on doubts and suspicion.  The lack  of  an  economic  incentive  to
    return to the country of origin was not in itself determinative  of  an
    application.

Assessment of the Issues

15.  The appellants have to meet the requirements  of  para  41  of  HC  395
    before they can be granted entry clearance as visitors.  The onus is on
    them to show that they can meet these  requirements  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities.

16.  The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the sponsor and her  husband  had
    adequate means to provide  for  the  maintenance  and  support  of  the
    appellants for the duration of their visit.   There  is  no  issue  now
    about the relationship of the appellants  to  each  other.   There  was
    concern about the accommodation but  I  accept  that  this  is  a  four
    bedroom house.  I also accept the sponsor's evidence that at  the  date
    of decision three of the bedrooms were in use, one by herself  and  her
    husband, another by her husband's parents and a third  by  her  younger
    brother then aged 15/16.  There was therefore one spare  bedroom  which
    was available for use by the first appellant and her  young  son.   The
    requirements of the rules as to accommodation were therefore met and  I
    am satisfied that adequate accommodation was available for the proposed
    visit.

17.  This leaves the issue of whether the  appellants  intended  to  make  a
    visit for the period claimed and to leave at the end  of  the  proposed
    visit.  The primary issue of concern arises from the fact that there is
    virtually no evidence of the family  circumstances  of  the  appellant.
    The first appellant made it clear in her application form that she  had
    no income and was supported by her husband although she  did  refer  to
    family land.  I accept the evidence that the first appellant is married
    as she claims to her husband and that he runs a small business which is
    the main source income for the family.  A field visit  confirmed  their
    address although the officer commented on the  financial  condition  of
    the family.  I also  accept  that  there  is  some  family  land.   The
    position appears to be  that  the  family  are  getting  by  but  their
    economic situation is not such they could afford the  trip  from  their
    own resources.

18.  However, so far as this visit is concerned all the expenses  are  being
    met by the first appellant's brother and the sponsor in  this  country.
    I also accept the sponsor's evidence  that  the  first  appellant  will
    return to her husband in Bangladesh not only to  continue  family  life
    and to look after him but also to continue looking  after  parents  and
    other relatives who live nearby.  The second appellant is  only  4  and
    will need to start school soon.  Whilst the  first  appellant  may  not
    have an economic motive for returning to  Bangladesh,  I  am  satisfied
    that there is a strong family motive to rejoin her husband and extended
    family.

19.  I also take into account when considering intentions the fact that  the
    sponsor has made it clear that she regards it as her responsibility  to
    do her best to make sure that the appellants adhere to  the  conditions
    of their leave to enter.  Neither appellant has any adverse immigration
    history.  I also remind myself that poor economic circumstances do  not
    by themselves justify the refusal of an application for a family visit:
    see in particular Ogunkola [2002] UKIAT 02238.  Looking at the evidence
    as a whole I am satisfied that the appellants  are  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules for a family visit and that the appeal should
    be allowed accordingly.

Decision

20.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside the decision and re-
    make it allowing the appeal of both appellants.




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

    In the light of my decision allowing the appeals I now consider whether
    to make an award for the remittal of the fee.  Taking into account  the
    Presidential Guidance Notes, I am satisfied that the whole of the  fees
    paid in respect of both appeals should be remitted.






Signed                                  Dated: 21 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

