
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/29475/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  24 October 2013                           |On 7 November 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                             IFEATU FAVOUR OKEKE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-LAGOS

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A. Ariyo, Solicitor: Apex Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 12 August  1986.  His
       appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  ("ECO")  decision  to
       refuse entry clearance as a (family) visitor was dismissed by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge C.M.A. Jones in a determination  promulgated  on
       26 July 2013.

    2. The application for entry clearance was refused on 13 July  2012  on
       the basis that the appellant had used false documents in support  of
       the application, leading to a refusal under paragraph 320(7A) of  HC
       395 (as amended), as well as under paragraph 41.

    3. The reasons given for the refusal of the application in more  detail
       were, that the appellant had submitted a bank statement in the  name
       of B.F.E Ventures but enquiries with the bank revealed that although
       the bank statement was genuine the account holder was  unaware  that
       the account was to be used in support of the application  for  entry
       clearance. Tax documents had been confirmed to be false as they  did
       not emanate from the tax office claimed.

    4. Judge Jones took into account what was said to be a letter from  the
       United Bank for Africa ("UBA") dated 28 March 2013  which  purported
       to show  that  the  account  holder  and  business  partner  of  the
       appellant did  now  support  the  use  of  the  account.  The  judge
       nevertheless concluded that at  the  time  the  bank  statement  was
       submitted it was in an attempt to deceive. A  letter  from  the  tax
       office said to explain the issue of the tax receipts did not in  the
       judge's view answer  the  point  made  by  the  ECO  about  the  tax
       documents.

    5. The judge therefore found that paragraph 320(7A) was  made  out  and
       that consequently the appellant was not able to  establish  that  he
       was a genuine visitor who intended to leave the UK at the end of the
       period of the visit, with reference to paragraph 41(i) and (ii).

Submissions

    6. Mr Ariyo submitted that the letters that the appellant had  produced
       did, contrary to the judge's conclusions, address the matters raised
       in relation to the bank account and the tax documents. I pointed out
       that the account number on the letter from UBA said to relate to the
       account of B.F.E. Ventures was different from the account number  on
       the bank statement of that  business  that  the  appellant  used  in
       support of the application, and that there were spelling or  grammar
       mistakes in  the  bank  letter  ('reference'  spelt  "refrence"  and
       'resolved the issue' written as "resolved the issued"). In response,
       Mr Ariyo suggested that  if  there  were  concerns  about  the  bank
       letter, the matter  should  be  remitted  to  the  ECO  for  further
       enquiries.

    7. Mr  Bramble  accepted  that  where  there  is  an  allegation  under
       paragraph 320(7A) later evidence could be  taken  into  account  and
       here the judge appears to have made an artificial separation between
       the evidence. As to what impact that possible error could have  had,
       one has to take into account that the account numbers on the  letter
       and on the relevant account itself were  different.  In  any  event,
       there was more to consider than simply the bank account.

    8. In relation to the tax documents, the judge was correct to find that
       the letter did not resolve  the  concern  about  the  documents  not
       emanating from the tax office, that letter relating to the basis  on
       which tax was paid rather than whether the tax  documents  had  come
       from the tax office. Even if the  judge  had  adopted  an  incorrect
       approach, that was not a material error.

    9. In reply Mr Ariyo submitted that there was  no  dishonesty  evident,
       which was a necessary condition for  the  application  of  paragraph
       320(7A). The issue over the account number could have been a mistake
       on the part of the bank over which the appellant has no control.

My assessment

   10. I have taken into account the skeleton argument submitted in support
       of the appeal before me, albeit that Mr Ariyo did not refer to it in
       his submissions. In any event, it makes  the  same  points  as  were
       advanced in submissions. There is also a witness statement from  the
       appellant (although described  as  the  statement  of  someone  else
       entirely). The witness statement provided in support of  the  appeal
       to the Upper Tribunal again makes  the  same  points.  The  business
       registration certificate referred to in that witness  statement  has
       not been provided but in any event it is not evidence  that  can  be
       taken into account in considering whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in law, it not having been evidence put before that Tribunal.

   11. The grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal are  to  the  effect
       that the two letters to which  reference  has  been  made  above  do
       address the concerns raised by the ECO. No  point  is  made  in  the
       grounds, and none was advanced before me, in terms of  the  document
       verification  reports  ("DVR")  not  having  been  provided  to  the
       appellant. I mention that because it is a contention that was raised
       in the original grounds to the First-tier Tribunal but as I say, was
       not advanced before me, doubtless because it is an argument that has
       no merit having regard to the matters set out in the Entry Clearance
       Manager's review.

   12. Although Mr Bramble suggested that the  First-tier  judge  may  have
       been wrong artificially to separate the date of  decision  from  the
       evidence relevant to dishonesty that came after the decision,  I  do
       not consider that the judge did fall into error in this respect.

   13. The appellant submitted a bank statement  from  B.F.E.  Ventures  in
       support of the application for entry clearance. The  DVR,  following
       the e-mail from UBA to the ECO on a pro forma, states that  although
       the bank statement is genuine "our client" (the account  holder)  is
       not aware that it has been used to sponsor the visa application.  As
       Judge  Jones  correctly  observed  at  [10],  the   implication   on
       proffering the bank statement was that the appellant had  access  to
       the funds therein for the purpose of the application. At the time it
       was proffered the account holder was not aware that it had been used
       to support the application.

   14. The letter dated 28 March 2013 (about eight months after  the  ECO's
       decision), said to be from UBA bank is on headed paper with the bank
       logo at the top. The original is on the  Tribunal  file.  It  states
       that after further verification the Managing Director of the company
       (B.F.E. Ventures) has confirmed that the appellant "was his business
       partner and that he was not in the country when the application  was
       made." It goes on to  state  that  "The  two  individuals  have  now
       resolved the issued (sic), as stated earlier that the bank statement
       is genuine."

   15. Judge Jones referred to that letter and its  contents  at  [10].  At
       [11] she stated that she was bound to consider the situation  as  it
       was at the date of decision. She concluded that  at  that  time  the
       bank statement was used it was intended to deceive,  justifying  the
       320(7A) refusal.

   16. The letter dated 28 March 2013 said to be from UBA does not indicate
       or suggest that at the time of the application for  entry  clearance
       the other party to the account consented to its use  in  support  of
       the application, or would have consented to its use had he/she known
       about it. The evidence in that letter post-dates the decision and is
       not evidence of the circumstances obtaining at the date of decision,
       even assuming that its content does provide an explanation  for  the
       response given by UBA to the ECO.  The letter  does  not  alter  the
       fact that at the time of the application the appellant purported  to
       have  authority  to  use  the  bank  statement  in  support  of  the
       application when the evidence indicated that he did not. That he and
       the other person, whoever that may be, have  subsequently  'resolved
       the issue' does not alter that fact.

   17. Although the letter states that  the  appellant  and  his  "business
       partner" have now resolved 'the issue', as I pointed out there is no
       information as to who the business  partner  is  or  how  they  have
       resolved the issue. Mr Ariyo was not able to provide any information
       as to who is the managing director of B.F.E. Ventures,  referred  to
       in the letter.  Indeed,  the  letter's  reference  to  their  having
       resolved the issue suggests that there  was  no  authority  for  the
       appellant to use the bank statement in support of the application at
       the time the application was made.

   18. In any event, the letter from UBA appears  on  the  face  of  it  to
       relate to a different account entirely, given the differences in the
       account numbers to which I have referred at [6] above. That, and the
       other matters I  have  referred  to  in  relation  to  the  letter's
       content, would have featured in an analysis of  the  reliability  of
       that document in any re-making of the decision. However,  these  are
       matters  that  do   not   require   further   exploration   in   the
       circumstances.

   19. I am satisfied that the judge did not fall into legal error  in  the
       conclusion that she came to in respect of that letter.

   20. For completeness, it is as well to observe that the judge  correctly
       identified that it was for  the  ECO  to  establish  that  paragraph
       320(7A) applied, albeit that at [8] she overstated the  standard  of
       proof, which is the ordinary civil standard. In concluding that  the
       appellant's use of the bank statement was intended  to  deceive  she
       effectively concluded that he had been dishonest, a requirement that
       needs to be established for 320(7A) to bite.

   21. In those circumstances, there is no need to go on  to  consider  the
       judge's assessment of the tax receipts issue, because the refusal in
       respect of  320(7A)  was  made  out  in  connection  with  the  bank
       statement. Nevertheless, I go on to consider the complaint  made  in
       relation to the judge's treatment of the tax receipts.

   22. The DVR in respect of the tax receipts states that the  Lagos  State
       Internal Revenue Service confirmed that the tax receipts  relied  on
       by the appellant did not emanate from their tax office. There is  an
       e-mail from the Revenue Service to that  effect  which  states  that
       they should therefore be treated as counterfeit.

   23. Judge Jones had before her, and considered, a letter dated 26  March
       2013 on headed paper said to be from the Revenue Service. It  states
       that the appellant had written a protest letter to them. It  states,
       in effect, that having considered the receipt provided he  made  the
       tax payment under the wrong tax code namely PAYE, whereas it  should
       have been on a self-employed basis. The letter goes on to state that
       "we believe this might have form (sic) the  basis  of  the  response
       from our head office to your office" and that "the  tax  payment  is
       correct and the receipt was genuinely issued by us." It is contended
       on behalf of the appellant that  that  letter  shows  that  the  tax
       receipts that the appellant submitted were genuine.

   24. The judge stated at [14] that the explanation given in  that  letter
       does not answer the allegation made in the DVR that the tax receipts
       did not emanate from  their  tax  office  and  should  therefore  be
       treated as counterfeit. The question of whether the wrong  code  was
       or was not used is irrelevant to that issue, she concluded.

   25. I am satisfied that Judge Jones was entitled to find that the letter
       said to be from the Revenue Service does not deal with the fact that
       the e-mail to the ECO stated that the tax receipts did  not  emanate
       from the tax office. That e-mail does not  say  anything  about  the
       appellant's status as a tax payer or the tax coding. Confusion or  a
       mistake over the tax code does not explain why the  Revenue  Service
       stated that the receipts did not come from their office  and  should
       therefore be treated as counterfeit.

   26. Even if the letter that is said to be from the Revenue Service could
       be said to establish that the tax receipts  are  genuine,  paragraph
       320(7A) is nevertheless made out because of the use by the appellant
       of  the  bank  statement  in  the  name  of   B.F.E.   Ventures   in
       circumstances where he had no authority to use it in support of  the
       application.

   27. I am not satisfied therefore, that there is any error of law in  the
       decision made by the First-tier Tribunal and the decision to dismiss
       the appeal with reference to paragraph 320(7A) and  paragraph  41(i)
       and (ii) therefore stands. It is not necessary to go on to  consider
       the questions of maintenance and accommodation which, although  part
       of the refusal decision by the ECO by extension of the main  grounds
       for refusal, did not feature in the First-tier judge's decision.





Decision

   28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules therefore
       stands.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                     4/11/13
