
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/29038/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th June 2013                               |On 4th July 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                 Rumel Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - dHAKA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan of Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born on 1st  March  1982.
    He applied for entry clearance to visit his family  in  the  UK  for  a
    period of four weeks.  That application was  refused  for  the  reasons
    given in a Notice of Decision dated  23rd  July  2012.   The  Appellant
    appealed that decision, and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Carroll (the Judge) sitting at  Taylor  House  on  14th  February
    2013.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  his
    Determination dated 25th February 2013.  The Appellant sought leave  to
    appeal, and on 2nd May 2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the Judge's decision contained  an  error  on  a
    point of law so that it should  be  set  aside.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer refused the application for leave to enter because he  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant's  circumstances  in  Bangladesh  were  as
    claimed and therefore that the Appellant was a genuine visitor for  the
    period as stated by him who would leave  the  UK  at  the  end  of  his
    proposed visit.  The Judge dismissed the appeal for the  same  reasons,
    having carefully analysed the documentary evidence before him  relating
    to the Appellant's earnings in Bangladesh.   At  the  hearing,  it  was
    argued by Mr Khan that the Judge had erred in law in this respect.  The
    documentary  evidence  submitted  showed  that  the   Appellant   owned
    substantial areas of land in Bangladesh which was under cultivation and
    would therefore produce  an  income.   The  documentary  evidence  also
    established that the Appellant  had  an  income  as  claimed  from  the
    business known as KCS, and the  authenticity  of  the  bank  statements
    relating to the Appellant's income  had  not  been  challenged  at  the
    hearing.  The Judge had attached inappropriate weight  to  the  various
    different spellings of the full name of KCS given in the documents, and
    the partnership deed relating to KCS gave details  of  the  partnership
    which the Judge had commented were missing.

 3. In response, Ms Everett submitted that there was no material  error  of
    law in the Judge's decision.  The problem with the spelling of the full
    name of KCS had not been material to the Judge's decision.   The  Judge
    had come to  his  finding  in  respect  of  that  company  because  the
    Appellant only had a  five  percent  share  in  it  and  there  was  no
    documentary evidence as to the profits made by the company.  The income
    of the company could not be estimated from the small number of receipts
    produced.  The discrepancy in the account number of the bank statements
    produced by the Appellant was put to Mr Khan at the hearing as recorded
    in paragraph 12 of the Determination.

 4. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.  He carried out  a
    thorough analysis of the  evidence  before  him  and  was  entitled  to
    conclude that he was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  financial
    circumstances in Bangladesh were as claimed by  him.   The  Judge  gave
    more than adequate reasons for that conclusion.  He cannot  be  faulted
    for finding  that  the  documentary  evidence  did  not  establish  the
    Appellant's income from the business known as KCS, nor for that  matter
    from any other source.  That being the case, the Judge was entitled  to
    find that the  Appellant  had  insufficient  ties  with  Bangladesh  to
    satisfy him that his intentions in  proposing  to  visit  the  UK  were
    genuine.

Decision

 5. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason for me to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
