
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
VA/30500/2012
                                                               VA/30495/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 September 2013                        |On 6 September 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR PEDRO MAGNO CENIZAL
                         MRS ERLINDA CENIZAL BRIONES
                                                                 Respondents


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr S Walker a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
                            For the Respondent: Ms R Infante a
           Solicitor and a relative of the appellant's
                            acting pro bono

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Entry Clearance Officer in Manila ("The ECO") the
      respondents are citizens of the Philippines. He was born on 19 October
      1950 and she on 26 December 1964. They are brother and sister. I  will
      refer to them as the brother  and  the  sister  and  together  as  the
      appellants.  The  ECO  has  been  given  permission  to   appeal   the
      determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Blackford who dismissed the
      appellants' appeals against the ECO's decision  of  25  July  2012  to
      refuse them entry clearance to the UK as  family  visitors  under  the
      provisions of paragraphs 40 to 43 and 320 of the Immigration Rules.

   2. Three members of the same family made family visitor  applications  at
      the same time; the brother and sister and their mother who was born on
      6 October 1926. The family had asked  the  brother  to  accompany  his
      mother and  sister  because  they  had  never  travelled  outside  the
      Philippines and the mother was elderly.

   3. The applications were refused largely because of matters  relating  to
      the brother. The ECO said that he had been granted  a  previous  visit
      visa to enter the UK. The ECO made some minor mistakes with dates  but
      at this stage I will quote those which were given. The brother is said
      to have entered the UK on 16 June  2001  (he  is  more  likely  to  be
      correct that it was 10 June 2001) but his expired Philippine  passport
      which he submitted with the current application contained a Philippine
      Immigration arrival stamp showing that he returned to the  Philippines
      on 2 July 2001. However checks made by the ECO showed that the brother
      made an application for asylum in the UK on 25  July  2001  which  was
      refused on 28 August 2001. The brother appealed  and  he  attended  an
      appeal hearing in the UK on 27 February 2002. The ECO  took  the  view
      that the Philippine Immigration arrival stamp dated 2  July  2001  was
      not a true reflection of his travel history  damaged  his  credibility
      and cast doubt both on his intentions in applying for a visa  to  come
      to the UK and his intention to leave at the end of the visit.

   4. Furthermore, the bank statements submitted by the brother  and  sister
      did not  show  the  history  of  the  funds  and  the  sponsor's  bank
      statements showed only limited funds. The ECO was not  satisfied  that
      the appellants had shown that they had  sufficient  funds  to  support
      themselves without recourse to public funds or  taking  employment  or
      that they would be maintained and accommodated adequately by relatives
      or friends.

   5.  The  application  was  also  refused  under  paragraph  320  of   the
      Immigration Rules because the ECO was satisfied that the  brother  was
      in the UK at the time and  that  the  Philippine  Immigration  arrival
      stamp dated 2 July 2001 was  not  a  true  reflection  of  his  travel
      history and he had made a false representation.

   6. The two  appellants  and  their  mother  appealed  to  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal but the mother subsequently withdrew her appeal  because,  on
      reconsideration, the Entry Clearance Manager issued her with a  family
      visit visa which, I am told, expires on 5 October 2013.  There  is  no
      indication why she was issued with a Visa on reconsideration  but  the
      other two appellants were not.

   7. The appellants asked for the appeal to be  determined  on  the  papers
      which is what the judge did on 18 June 2013. He found that the reasons
      given by the ECO did not  justify  the  refusal  and  he  allowed  the
      appeals of both appellants.

   8. The ECO applied for and was granted permission to appeal arguing  that
      the judge erred in law by failing to find that the appellants  made  a
      false representation and that he  applied  an  incorrect  standard  of
      proof.

   9. In his determination the judge raised the point  which  had  not  been
      taken by the ECO. He said that in his answer to  question  74  on  the
      application form which read "have you ever being deported, removed  or
      otherwise required to  leave  any  country  including  the  UK?";  the
      brother had replied "no"  which  was  "almost  certainly  wrong".  The
      judge's reasoning was that the brother had applied for asylum in 2001,
      gone through the appeal process and lost his appeal  as  a  result  of
      which he would have been required to leave the United Kingdom. I  find
      that  this  is  not  a  point  which  counts  against  either  of  the
      appellants. It does not show that they failed to comply  with  any  of
      the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  should  not  result  in
      their appeals being dismissed. I reach  this  conclusion  for  several
      reasons. Firstly, Mr Walker informed me that the ECO did not  wish  to
      take up and pursue the point. Secondly, the ECO has never produced any
      documentary evidence to  show  that  the  brother  was  ever  formally
      required to leave  the  UK.  Indeed,  documentary  evidence  has  been
      produced which shows  that  he  left  the  UK  voluntarily  after  the
      Adjudicator ruled against him in  his  appeal.  Before  the  time  for
      appealing against this determination expired he wrote to the  Tribunal
      stating that he was leaving the country voluntarily as a result of his
      father's death and mother's illness. The evidence shows  that  he  did
      leave at this time. Furthermore, there is no reason  why  this  factor
      should impinge on the sister's appeal.

  10. Mr Walker accepted that the judge found in favour of the appellants in
      relation to the funds available for the proposed visit and  that  they
      satisfied the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to
      maintenance and accommodation. He also accepted that  this  conclusion
      had not been challenged in the grounds of appeal  and  that  that  the
      only outstanding point in  the  appeals  arose  as  a  result  of  the
      Philippines  Immigration  return  stamp  dated  2  July  2001  in  the
      brother's expired passport.

  11. Ever since the point  was  brought  to  his  attention  the  brother's
      position has been that the Philippines Immigration return stamp  dated
      2 July 2001 in his expired passport must have been  an  administrative
      error by the Philippines Immigration authorities. With some small  and
      immaterial differences as to the precise dates, which I consider to be
      slips by the ECO, both the brother and the ECO say that he came to the
      UK in mid June 2001, applied for asylum, had  the  application  turned
      down, attended the appeal hearing on 27th of February  2002  and  lost
      his appeal. Both he and the ECO say that  he  did  not  leave  the  UK
      during this period. I find that he  was  in  the  UK  throughout  this
      period and that he left the UK and  returned  to  the  Philippines  in
      April 2002.

  12. I asked Mr Walker how the ECO argued that the brother had  made  false
      representations or submitted false documents or information or  failed
      to disclose material facts. Mr Walker could not think of  any  way  in
      which he might have done so except possibly if he had returned to  the
      Philippines on 2 July 2001 and then come back to the UK before  making
      his application for asylum on 25 July 2001. However, he accepted  that
      if he had done so  it  was  probable  that  his  passport  would  have
      contained not only a departure stamp from the  Philippine  authorities
      but also an arrival stamp from the UK authorities. The  ECO  had  seen
      the passport but not suggested that there were any such stamps. It was
      not suggested that the brother had forged the stamp in  his  passport.
      Indeed, there would be no reason to him to do so because  it  hindered
      rather than helped his case. It was not suggested  that  the  passport
      was forged or not genuine in any other way.

  13. Mr Walker indicated that he had no further submissions to make. If the
      judge erred in law by addressing the point in relation to question  74
      on the brothers application form this was,  for  the  reasons  I  have
      given, an immaterial error which could have made no difference to  the
      outcome. I find that on the evidence before him it  was  open  to  the
      judge to come to the conclusions  that  the  appellants  met  all  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules for family visitors and that the
      ECO  had  not  established,  to  the  standard  of  the   balance   of
      probabilities, that either appellant's application  should  have  been
      refused under the provisions of Paragraph 320. There had been no false
      representations made or false documents or  information  submitted  or
      material facts not disclosed.

  14. I find that the judge did not err in law or that if he did  the  error
      is not such that his decision  should  be  set  aside.  I  uphold  the
      judge's decision allowing the appeals of  both  appellants  under  the
      Immigration Rules.

  15. The original purpose of the visit was for the brother  and  sister  to
      accompany their mother on a family visit to the  UK.  She  is  now  86
      years of age and her visa expires on 5 October 2013. I trust that  the
      ECO will expedite the visas for  both  appellants  so  that  they  can
      accompany her to this country before her visa expires.




      .............................................
            Signed                                          Date 4
      September 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

