

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number VA/31628/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
                         Determination Promulgated
On 3rd July 2013
                             On 4th July 2013
Prepared 3rd July 2013

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN

                                     and

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                               Md ABDUL HANNAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr Z Khan (Solicitor, Universal Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant applied for a visit visa to the  UK.  The  application  was
   refused for the reasons given in the Refusal Notice of the 30th  of  July
   2012. The Appellant's appeal was heard on  the  8th  of  April  2013  and
   dismissed in a determination promulgated on the 16th of April 2013.

2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal asserting that  the  Judge  had
   erred in his assessment of the evidence relating to the Appellant's shop,
   the Appellant had explained why his plans for his visit had  changed  and
   this had not been taken into account. It  was  also  submitted  that  the
   Judge had disregarded evidence relating to  the  Sponsor's  circumstances
   and had not assessed the Sponsor's ability to  maintain  and  accommodate
   the Appellant in the UK.

3. At the start of the hearing it was indicated to Mr Khan that we  intended
   to consider the appeal with regard to the Appellant's intention  and  the
   genuineness of the visit first and then to consider the circumstances  of
   the Sponsor if still relevant.

4. Mr Khan adopted the arguments in the grounds and  argued  that  the  name
   that the Appellant chose to call his shop was irrelevant, that the  Judge
   had not considered the documentary evidence and what the Sponsor had said
   about the credits into the account in his  oral  evidence.  The  deposits
   represented the gross income, not the Appellant's net income and much  of
   the Appellant's business was in cash. The Judge did not find against  the
   Sponsor's credibility and did not appear to mention it. For the Secretary
   of State it was argued that the Judge had recorded the evidence  and  had
   read the bundles the decision was both sound and lawful.

5. The determination is not as thorough as it might have been and  it  would
   have been better if the Judge  had  dealt  with  the  deposits  into  the
   account  more  explicitly  in  his  decision  section.  That   said   the
   determination does contain a  summary  of  the  reasons  for  refusal  in
   paragraphs 14 and 15 and the evidence of  the  Sponsor  in  paragraph  17
   including his explanation for the  deposits,  to  the  effect  that  they
   represented customer debts he had called in.

6.  The  evidence  was  analysed  in  paragraph  22.  The  Judge  noted  the
   difference between the name of the store and the reality  of  it;  not  a
   department store, but a small neighbourhood grocer's shop, which evidence
   to which Mr Khan referred us shows ordered its supplies a few boxes at  a
   time. He clearly did not accept that it was the kind  of  business  which
   could have called in debts so as  to  produce  the  very  large  deposits
   recorded. His analysis of the Appellant's change of plans did not involve
   a rejection of the Appellant's explanation rather his concerns centred on
   the lack of knowledge of the Sponsor  about  the  Appellant's  change  of
   plans and their failure to discuss it. The Judge took the view that  this
   was contrary  to  the  claimed  regular  contact  between  them  and,  by
   implication, that they were not in such close contact  as  claimed.  This
   undermined the evidence of the Sponsor.

7. The Judge did consider the Sponsor's evidence in paragraph 23.  He  found
   that the Sponsor knew little of the Appellant's plans and he went  on  to
   find that he could not be satisfied with the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor.
   That would have  included  the  Sponsor's  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
   circumstances.

8. The finding in paragraph 24 of the determination, that the Appellant  was
   not a genuine visitor and that he did not intend to leave the UK  at  the
   end of his visit was one  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  make.  The
   reliability of the Sponsor's evidence had not been accepted and the Judge
   clearly had in mind the limitations  of  the  evidence  relating  to  the
   Appellant's circumstances in Bangladesh. The  Judge  had  to  assess  the
   Appellant's intentions and the burden was on him to show on a balance  of
   probabilities that he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The
   actions of  other  family  members  in  visiting  the  UK  could  not  be
   determinative of the Appellant's intentions, especially if the supporting
   evidence he had provided was insufficient  to  discharge  the  burden  of
   proof.

9. In summary the Judge clearly had regard to all of the evidence  that  was
   presented  and  gave  sufficient  reasons  for  not  accepting  that  the
   Appellant had shown that he was a genuine visitor or that he intended  to
   leave the UK. This is not a reflection of the position of the Sponsor and
   there are criticisms of the manner in which the  Sponsor's  circumstances
   were considered, particularly with regard to the consideration  of  post-
   decision evidence. However, in view of the findings  that  we  have  made
   these could have no bearing on the outcome of this appeal and we  do  not
   consider them.





CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and we make no
order or direction.

Fee Award

We make no fee award.

Reasons: Appeal dismissed.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 3rd July 2013

