

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/31011/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent on:                     |
|On 12 July  2013                              |On 15 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                           MR MALIK KHAWAR MAHMOOD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the appellant: None
For the respondent:  Ms S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                             DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has appealed with  permission
        against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert sent
        on 12 April 2013 dismissing his appeal against the decision made by
        the respondent refusing to grant him entry clearance  as  a  family
        visitor.


     2. The grounds submit  that  the  judge  has  issued  a  determination
        relating to a different appellant and they  also  set  out  reasons
        supported by further documentation why they consider  the  ECO  was
        wrong to refuse the application.


     3. It is manifest that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  judge
        relates to an entirely different person. Miss Vidyadharan confirmed
        this and also supplied the name of the gentleman whose  particulars
        are described by the judge.


     4. In such circumstances the  judge's  determination  is  vitiated  by
        legal error and must be set aside.


     5. I turn to consider what decision I should re-make. Before me  there
        was no representation on behalf of the appellant and no  appearance
        from the sponsor, but there was a letter addressed to the  Tribunal
        from the nominated sponsor, Mr Mussawar Abbas, stating that he  did
        not know the appellant and had never agreed to sponsor him  and  in
        his view his name had been used fraudulently.


     6. Given that the appellant's application form gave  Mr  Abbas's  name
        and address and that the letter sent by the  Tribunal  to  him  had
        been the subject of a response in  the  form  of  the  letter  just
        described, I consider that the appellant's appeal must be dismissed
        as  the  evidence  does  not  establish  that  he  has   a   family
        relationship with the nominated sponsor.


     7. Further and in any event,  although  the  appellant  has  submitted
        additional documents seeking to address the concerns raised by  the
        ECO in the reasons for refusal correspondence, they do  not  in  my
        judgment afford a satisfactory explanation for the attempt  by  the
        appellant to rely on bank statements as evidence of  his  financial
        viability when between January and June 2012 a sum  vastly  greater
        than his monthly income was deposited  into  his  account.  If  the
        truth of the matter, as  now  claimed,  was  that  his  father  who
        conducts a real estate business put the money in to the appellant's
        account, that should have been stated at the time.


     8. For the above reasons:


        The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law and his decision is  set
        aside.


        The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.


                               Signed


                               Date:




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
