
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/33121/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 20th August 2013                           |On 22nd August 2013          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ABU DHABI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MRS ZAHIR BEGUM
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Pettersen - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mrs Ahmed - Sponsor in person.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Turnock promulgated on 10th April 2013 in  which  he  allowed
        Mrs Begum's appeal against the refusal of  entry  clearance  for  a
        family visit.  The application was made on 11th July 2012  and  the
        date of decision is the 2nd August 2012.


     2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis  the  Judge  had
        misdirected himself in law in failing to consider whether there was
        a valid appeal against the immigration decision.


     3. Although this point does not appear to have been raised  previously
        I have   jurisdiction  to  consider  it  as  confirmed  in  Virk  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  652  in
        which it was held that although the SSHD had failed to raise before
        the First-tier Tribunal the issue of that  Tribunal's  jurisdiction
        to entertain a family's application for leave to remain, the  Upper
        Tribunal was entitled to dismiss  the  family's  subsequent  appeal
        against the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the  basis  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal had not had jurisdiction, notwithstanding  that
        the point had not  been  raised  below.   It  was  said  "Statutory
        jurisdiction cannot be conferred by waiver or agreement; or by  the
        failure of the parties or the tribunal to be alive to the point".


     4. The jurisdictional point arises because the application was made on
        11th July 2012 two days after the changes to the Immigration  Rules
        which had effect from 9th  July  2012  and  which  applied  to  all
        applications made after that date. For applications submitted  from
        9th  July  2012,  but  before  25th  June  2103,   the   applicable
        regulations  are   the   Immigration   Appeals   (Family   Visitor)
        Regulations 2012. These essentially define the family  relationship
        of the person the applicant must be visiting in  order  to  have  a
        right of appeal under the Immigration Rules. In relation to nephews
        or nieces there is no longer a right of appeal for  those  visiting
        this category.


     5. The Judge makes reference to the fact the sponsor,  who  Mrs  Begum
        intended  to  visit,  is  her  niece  in  paragraph   11   of   the
        determination and so the relationship was clearly known.  There  is
        however  no  indication  in  the  determination  that   the   Judge
        considered the date  of  application,  the  changes  to  the  Rules
        limiting the rights of appeal, or the fact  that  as  the  proposed
        visit was  to  a  prohibited  class  the  only  grounds  of  appeal
        available to the appellant are those found in section  84  (1)  (b)
        and (c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


     6. I find Judge Turnock erred in law in proceeding to allow the appeal
        under the Immigration Rules  when  he  fails  to  say  why  he  had
        jurisdiction to do so in a  determination  drafted  solely  on  the
        basis of a proposed visit by Mrs Begum to her niece.


     7. I note that the grounds of appeal challenging the decision  alleges
        the decision is unlawful as it is  incompatible  with  Mrs  Begum's
        rights under the ECHR indicating that  human  rights  grounds  were
        raised although there is nothing in  the  documentary  evidence  or
        before the Judge to show there is in  any  merit  in  this  ground.
        Having reviewed the papers there is insufficient evidence to  allow
        Mrs Begum to succeed as it is clearly a proportionate  decision  in
        light of the nature of the relationship and limited evidence to the
        contrary.


     8. In considering whether the Judge's error is  material  I  have  had
        regard to the application form in its entirety.  Although I  assume
        Judge Turnock also read this document there is no reference in  the
        determination to Part 7 of the application headed, family  visitors
        - relatives details, in which in addition into mentioning her niece
        as a person she proposed to visit, Mrs Begum  also  refers  to  two
        other named individuals, Maqbool Jan and Nazir Begum  who  live  in
        Derby, and who are stated to be sisters. The sponsor confirmed they
        are Mrs Begum's sisters as they share a common  mother  and  father
        with her. As Mrs  Begum  is  proposing  to  visit  her  sisters  in
        addition to her niece, and sisters do come within the definition of
        a qualifying family member in the 2012 Regulations, Mrs  Begum  did
        have a right of appeal under the Rules. I make this finding as  the
        contents  of  the  application  are  indicative  of  the  visitor's
        intention and such relatives are clearly  mentioned  as  individual
        she proposes to visit.


     9. I therefore find that had all the evidence been considered properly
        and the existence of the sisters noticed, it would have been  found
        that Mrs Begum did have a valid right of appeal. On that  basis  my
        finding is that the determination  contains  an  error  of  law  as
        identified in the  application  for  and  grant  of  permission  to
        appeal, but that because  a  full  investigation  shows  there  are
        people Mrs Begum proposed to visit which confers a right of appeal,
        any error is not material to the decision to allow the appeal.


Decision

    10. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    11. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as no application for anonymity was made and
   the need       for one is not established on the facts.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20th August 2013












