
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/34254/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2013                               |On 21 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                        miss SOFIA HASSANI SHEMAGHADA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania.   On  26  March  2013  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chambers dismissed her appeal against a decision made by  the
respondent on 6 September 2012 refusing to grant her entry clearance  as  a
domestic  worker  in  a  private  household  under  paragraph  159A  of  the
Immigration Rules which as from 6 April 2012 stated:


                   "Domestic Workers in Private Households


    Requirements for leave to enter as  a  domestic  worker  in  a  private
    household


    159A.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to  enter
           the United Kingdom as a domestic worker in a  private  household
           are that the applicant:


           (i)    is aged 18-65 inclusive; and


           (ii)   has been employed as a domestic worker for  one  year  or
                more  immediately  prior  to  the  application   for   entry
                clearance under the same  roof  as  the  employer  or  in  a
                household that the employer uses for himself  on  a  regular
                basis and where evidence ... is produced to demonstrate  the
                connection between employer and employee [in the form of;


                (a)    a  letter  from  the  employer  confirming  that  the
                    domestic worker  has  been  employed  by  them  in  that
                    capacity for the twelve months immediately prior to  the
                    date of application; and


                (b)    one of the  following  documents  covering  the  same
                    period of employment as that in (a):


                    (i)    pay slips or bank statements showing  payment  of
                        salary;


                    (ii)   confirmation of tax paid;


                    (iii)  confirmation of health insurance paid;


                    (iv)   contract of employment;


                    (v)     work  visa,  residence  permit   or   equivalent
                        passport endorsement for the country in  which  the
                        domestic worker has been employed by that employer;
                        or


                    (vi)    visas  or  equivalent  passport  endorsement  to
                        confirm that the domestic worker has travelled with
                        the employer]; and


           (iii)  intends to work for the employer whilst the  employer  is
                in the United Kingdom and intends to travel in  the  company
                of either;


                (a)     a  British  or  EEA  national  employer,   or   that
                    employer's British or EEA national spouse, civil partner
                    or child, where the employer's usual place of  residence
                    is outside the UK and where the employer does not intend
                    to remain in the UK beyond six months; or


                (b)    a British or EEA national employer's foreign national
                    spouse, civil partner or child where the  employer  does
                    not intend to remain in the UK beyond six months; or


                (c)    a foreign national employer or the employer's spouse,
                    civil partner or child where the employer is seeking  or
                    has been granted entry clearance or leave to enter under
                    Part 2 of these Rules; and


           (iv)   intends to leave the UK at the end of six months  in  the
                United  Kingdom  or  at  the  same  time  as  the  employer,
                whichever is the earlier; and


           (v)    has agreed in writing terms and conditions of  employment
                in the UK with the employer, ... including specifically that
                the applicant will be paid in accordance with  the  National
                Minimum Wage Act 1998 and any Regulations made under it, and
                provides [evidence of this in the form set out  in  Appendix
                7] this {sic} with the entry clearance application; and


           (vi)   will not take employment other than within the  terms  of
                this paragraph to work full time as a  domestic  worker  for
                the employer in a household that  the  employer  intends  to
                live in; and


           (vii)  can maintain and accommodate him  or  herself  adequately
                without recourse to public funds; and


           (viii)      holds a valid entry  clearance  for  entry  in  this
                capacity."


2. The form set out in Appendix 7 (to  which  para  159A(v)  refers)  is  as
follows:

    "Appendix 7 - Statement of Written Terms and Conditions  of  employment
    required in paragraphs 159A(v), 159D(iv) and 159EA(iii)


    Statement of the terms and conditions  of  employment  of  an  overseas
    domestic worker in a private household in the United Kingdom


    This form must be completed and signed by the employer, signed  by  the
    overseas  domestic  worker  and  submitted  with  the  entry  clearance
    application or  with  the  leave  to  remain  application  as  required
    by paragraphs 159A(v), 159D(iv)  and  159EA(iii) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.


    Please complete this form in capitals


    Name of employee:


    Name of employer:


    1. Job Title:


    2. Duties/Responsibilities:


    3. Date of start of employment in the UK:


    4. Employer's address in the UK:


    5. Employee's address in the UK (if different from 4 please explain):


    6. Employee's place of work in the  UK  (if  different  from  4  please
    explain):


    7. Rate of Pay per week/month:


    Note: By signing this document, the  employer  is  declaring  that  the
    employee will be paid in accordance with the National Minimum Wage  Act
    1998 and any  Regulations  made  under  it  for  the  duration  of  the
    employment.


    8. Hours of work per day/week:


    Free periods per day:
    Free periods per week:


    9. Details of sleeping accommodation:


    10. Details of Holiday entitlement:


    11. Ending the employment:


    Employee must give .......... weeks notice if he/she decides  to  leave
    his/her job.


    Employee is entitled to .......... weeks notice if the employer decides
    to dismiss him/her.


    Employee  is  employed  on  a  fixed-term  contract  until  (date)  [if
    applicable].


    Signed .......................... Date .................... (Employer)


    I confirm that the above reflects my conditions of employment:


    Signed .......................... Date ..................... (Employee)
    "



3. In refusing her application the respondent counted against the  appellant
that when she had been granted entry clearance as a domestic worker for  the
same employer on a previous occasion (in August 2011) she had  said  in  her
application form she intended only a four week  stay  whereas  in  fact  she
stayed nine and a half months.

4. The judge dismissed the appeal on three grounds:

    (1)  that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
         159A(iii)(b) (the 6 months time limit);
    (2)     that she could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  159(v)
         (the minimum wage requirement); and
    (3)  that the appellant had  failed  to  show  she  had  the  requisite
         intention  under  paragraph  159A(iv)  (the   requisite   intention
         requirement).


5. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf  of  the
appellant and there was no explanation for that.  In  such  circumstances  I
decided to exercise my discretion to proceed to determine the appeal in  the
absence of one of the parties.  As regards (1), Mr  Tufan  correctly  points
out  that  the  judge's  reasoning  was  defective  because  he  erroneously
considered that the appellant's last visit to the UK as  a  domestic  worker
was in breach of the time limit imposed by  paragraph  159A(iii)(b).   Since
the appellant's last entry clearance was issued in August  2011,  when  this
Rule did not contain any time limit, that was a plain error.

6. As regards (2), the minimum wage requirement at para  159A(v),  it  seems
to me that the FtT judge also erred in that he  appeared  to  consider  that
this  provision  required  the  decision-maker  to  be  satisfied  that  the
appellant would be likely to be paid the minimum wage when she  was  in  the
UK.  However its wording is confined to a requirement  to  produce  evidence
to show a signed written agreement has been reached  covering,  inter  alia,
payment of a minimum wage.

7.  As  regards  (3)  the  requisite  intention  requirement  at   paragraph
159A(iv),  Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had been  correct  nevertheless
to consider that the appellant had failed to show she would  stay  for  only
six months because last time she had stayed eight  months  longer  than  she
had said she would.  The difficulty with this submission is  that  in  paras
10-11 the only reason given by  the  judge  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
explanation for her longer stay (that she had intended a  shorter  trip  but
her employers changed their plans)  was  that  "it  is  the  action  of  the
employer, controlling conditions of work, times of travel and rates  of  pay
that place a domestic worker within or without the  ambit  of  the  relevant
Immigration Rule". That wrongly suggests that it is  the  intention  of  the
employer that is in issue, whereas the relevant rule is concerned only  with
the  intention  of  the  appellant.  The  appellant's  explanation  was   of
potential relevance and could not be dismissed out of hand  for  the  reason
given.

8. In light of the above I consider therefore that the judge  erred  in  law
and that his decision must be set aside.

Remaking the Decision

9. I do not consider that the appellant can succeed in her  appeal  because,
although the judge's reasoning on para 159(v) was  erroneous,  the  evidence
fails to show that the appellant met  the  requirements  of  that  paragraph
which  was  in  force  at  the  date  of  decision.  Whilst  the  FtT  judge
misunderstood its ambit, it is clear that the  appellant  had  not  produced
evidence to  show  she  had  agreed  in  writing  terms  and  conditions  of
employment in the UK in the  form  set  out  in  Appendix  7,  which  was  a
requirement of a Rules in force on  the  date  of  decision  (  6  September
2012).

10. For the above reasons:

    The FtT Judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.


    The decision I remake is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
