
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/36594/2012
                                                               VA/36596/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 September 2013                             |On 11 September 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE pinkerton

                                   Between

                              MRS REHMENA KHAN
                               MR HASHIR KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent

Representations:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Proceedings

 1.  The  appellants  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  visitors.   Their
    applications were refused and they appealed the decision.  A  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeals  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 25 June  2013.   The  respondent  sought  permission  to
    appeal the decision and this was granted, the judge granting permission
    commenting that the primary issue was whether the  appellants  intended
    to return to Pakistan after the proposed visit.  The judge  found  that
    they had "every incentive to return to Pakistan after a family visit".

 2. In essence the respondent argues that while there may be incentives for
    the appellants to return to Pakistan the judge has failed  to  consider
    their intentions.  In order to meet the requirements of the  Rules  the
    appellants must demonstrate that they intend to leave the UK at the end
    of their visit.

 3. Before me Mr Tarlow sought to argue that the determination did not give
    a balanced view of the evidence.

 4. I gave my decision at the hearing which is that the judge has not erred
    materially in the determination.  He was perfectly entitled to come  to
    the conclusions that he did for the reasons that he has  given  on  the
    evidence provided.  Essentially the judge weighed the evidence both for
    and against the appellants.  He found the sponsor to be credible and at
    paragraph 32 sets out his reasons why on the balance  of  probabilities
    the appellants have discharged the burden of proof upon them.

 5. If there is any criticism to be made of the judge it is  in  using  the
    words in the final sentence of paragraph 32 which is that he finds  the
    appellants have every incentive to return to Pakistan  after  a  family
    visit.  Upon a reading of the determination overall  it  is  abundantly
    clear that the judge was saying no more or less than on the balance  of
    probabilities the appellants would return to Pakistan.  He believed the
    sponsor and took into account the circumstances of  the  appellants  in
    Pakistan which provided every incentive for them to return.  It  cannot
    be argued sensibly that the judge made a finding other than  that  they
    would return at the conclusion of the visit.

Decision

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err in law in  the  determination
    and the decision therefore stands that these appeals are allowed  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 7. No anonymity direction has been made previously, a  direction  was  not
    applied for and I do not consider that in the particular  circumstances
    of this appeal an anonymity direction is required.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
Sitting in the Upper Tribunal

